The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysterious Stranger, and Other Stories
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Mysterious Stranger, and Other Stories

Author: Mark Twain

Release date: June 9, 2008 [eBook #3186]
                Most recently updated: August 26, 2021

Language: English

Credits: David Widger, Be Wolf and Donald F. Behan


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIOUS STRANGER, AND OTHER STORIES ***




THE MYSTERIOUS STRANGER

by Mark Twain


     Note: “The Mysterious Stranger” was written in 1898 and
     never finished. The editors of Twain's “Collected Works”
      completed the story prior to publication. At what point in
     this work Twain left off and where the editor's began
     is not made clear in the print copy used as the basis of
     this eBook.




Contents:

     The Mysterious Stranger
     A Fable
     Hunting The Deceitful Turkey
     The McWilliamses And The Burglar Alarm





THE MYSTERIOUS STRANGER



Chapter 1

It was in 1590--winter. Austria was far away from the world, and asleep;
it was still the Middle Ages in Austria, and promised to remain so
forever. Some even set it away back centuries upon centuries and said
that by the mental and spiritual clock it was still the Age of Belief
in Austria. But they meant it as a compliment, not a slur, and it was so
taken, and we were all proud of it. I remember it well, although I was
only a boy; and I remember, too, the pleasure it gave me.

Yes, Austria was far from the world, and asleep, and our village was in
the middle of that sleep, being in the middle of Austria. It drowsed in
peace in the deep privacy of a hilly and woodsy solitude where news from
the world hardly ever came to disturb its dreams, and was infinitely
content. At its front flowed the tranquil river, its surface painted
with cloud-forms and the reflections of drifting arks and stone-boats;
behind it rose the woody steeps to the base of the lofty precipice;
from the top of the precipice frowned a vast castle, its long stretch of
towers and bastions mailed in vines; beyond the river, a league to the
left, was a tumbled expanse of forest-clothed hills cloven by winding
gorges where the sun never penetrated; and to the right a precipice
overlooked the river, and between it and the hills just spoken of lay a
far-reaching plain dotted with little homesteads nested among orchards
and shade trees.

The whole region for leagues around was the hereditary property of a
prince, whose servants kept the castle always in perfect condition for
occupancy, but neither he nor his family came there oftener than once
in five years. When they came it was as if the lord of the world had
arrived, and had brought all the glories of its kingdoms along; and when
they went they left a calm behind which was like the deep sleep which
follows an orgy.

Eseldorf was a paradise for us boys. We were not overmuch pestered with
schooling. Mainly we were trained to be good Christians; to revere
the Virgin, the Church, and the saints above everything. Beyond these
matters we were not required to know much; and, in fact, not allowed
to. Knowledge was not good for the common people, and could make them
discontented with the lot which God had appointed for them, and God
would not endure discontentment with His plans. We had two priests. One
of them, Father Adolf, was a very zealous and strenuous priest, much
considered.

There may have been better priests, in some ways, than Father Adolf, but
there was never one in our commune who was held in more solemn and awful
respect. This was because he had absolutely no fear of the Devil. He was
the only Christian I have ever known of whom that could be truly said.
People stood in deep dread of him on that account; for they thought that
there must be something supernatural about him, else he could not be so
bold and so confident. All men speak in bitter disapproval of the Devil,
but they do it reverently, not flippantly; but Father Adolf's way was
very different; he called him by every name he could lay his tongue to,
and it made everyone shudder that heard him; and often he would
even speak of him scornfully and scoffingly; then the people crossed
themselves and went quickly out of his presence, fearing that something
fearful might happen.

Father Adolf had actually met Satan face to face more than once, and
defied him. This was known to be so. Father Adolf said it himself. He
never made any secret of it, but spoke it right out. And that he was
speaking true there was proof in at least one instance, for on that
occasion he quarreled with the enemy, and intrepidly threw his bottle at
him; and there, upon the wall of his study, was the ruddy splotch where
it struck and broke.

But it was Father Peter, the other priest, that we all loved best and
were sorriest for. Some people charged him with talking around in
conversation that God was all goodness and would find a way to save all
his poor human children. It was a horrible thing to say, but there was
never any absolute proof that Father Peter said it; and it was out of
character for him to say it, too, for he was always good and gentle and
truthful. He wasn't charged with saying it in the pulpit, where all the
congregation could hear and testify, but only outside, in talk; and it
is easy for enemies to manufacture that. Father Peter had an enemy and a
very powerful one, the astrologer who lived in a tumbled old tower up
the valley, and put in his nights studying the stars. Every one knew he
could foretell wars and famines, though that was not so hard, for there
was always a war, and generally a famine somewhere. But he could also
read any man's life through the stars in a big book he had, and find
lost property, and every one in the village except Father Peter stood in
awe of him. Even Father Adolf, who had defied the Devil, had a wholesome
respect for the astrologer when he came through our village wearing his
tall, pointed hat and his long, flowing robe with stars on it, carrying
his big book, and a staff which was known to have magic power. The
bishop himself sometimes listened to the astrologer, it was said, for,
besides studying the stars and prophesying, the astrologer made a great
show of piety, which would impress the bishop, of course.

But Father Peter took no stock in the astrologer. He denounced him
openly as a charlatan--a fraud with no valuable knowledge of any kind,
or powers beyond those of an ordinary and rather inferior human being,
which naturally made the astrologer hate Father Peter and wish to ruin
him. It was the astrologer, as we all believed, who originated the story
about Father Peter's shocking remark and carried it to the bishop. It
was said that Father Peter had made the remark to his niece, Marget,
though Marget denied it and implored the bishop to believe her and spare
her old uncle from poverty and disgrace. But the bishop wouldn't listen.
He suspended Father Peter indefinitely, though he wouldn't go so far as
to excommunicate him on the evidence of only one witness; and now Father
Peter had been out a couple of years, and our other priest, Father
Adolf, had his flock.

Those had been hard years for the old priest and Marget. They had been
favorites, but of course that changed when they came under the shadow
of the bishop's frown. Many of their friends fell away entirely, and the
rest became cool and distant. Marget was a lovely girl of eighteen when
the trouble came, and she had the best head in the village, and the most
in it. She taught the harp, and earned all her clothes and pocket money
by her own industry. But her scholars fell off one by one now; she was
forgotten when there were dances and parties among the youth of the
village; the young fellows stopped coming to the house, all except
Wilhelm Meidling--and he could have been spared; she and her uncle were
sad and forlorn in their neglect and disgrace, and the sunshine was gone
out of their lives. Matters went worse and worse, all through the two
years. Clothes were wearing out, bread was harder and harder to get.
And now, at last, the very end was come. Solomon Isaacs had lent all the
money he was willing to put on the house, and gave notice that to-morrow
he would foreclose.




Chapter 2

Three of us boys were always together, and had been so from the cradle,
being fond of one another from the beginning, and this affection
deepened as the years went on--Nikolaus Bauman, son of the principal
judge of the local court; Seppi Wohlmeyer, son of the keeper of the
principal inn, the “Golden Stag,” which had a nice garden, with shade
trees reaching down to the riverside, and pleasure boats for hire; and I
was the third--Theodor Fischer, son of the church organist, who was
also leader of the village musicians, teacher of the violin, composer,
tax-collector of the commune, sexton, and in other ways a useful
citizen, and respected by all. We knew the hills and the woods as well
as the birds knew them; for we were always roaming them when we had
leisure--at least, when we were not swimming or boating or fishing, or
playing on the ice or sliding down hill.

And we had the run of the castle park, and very few had that. It was
because we were pets of the oldest servingman in the castle--Felix
Brandt; and often we went there, nights, to hear him talk about old
times and strange things, and to smoke with him (he taught us that) and
to drink coffee; for he had served in the wars, and was at the siege of
Vienna; and there, when the Turks were defeated and driven away, among
the captured things were bags of coffee, and the Turkish prisoners
explained the character of it and how to make a pleasant drink out of
it, and now he always kept coffee by him, to drink himself and also to
astonish the ignorant with. When it stormed he kept us all night; and
while it thundered and lightened outside he told us about ghosts and
horrors of every kind, and of battles and murders and mutilations, and
such things, and made it pleasant and cozy inside; and he told these
things from his own experience largely. He had seen many ghosts in his
time, and witches and enchanters, and once he was lost in a fierce storm
at midnight in the mountains, and by the glare of the lightning had seen
the Wild Huntsman rage on the blast with his specter dogs chasing after
him through the driving cloud-rack. Also he had seen an incubus once,
and several times he had seen the great bat that sucks the blood from
the necks of people while they are asleep, fanning them softly with its
wings and so keeping them drowsy till they die.

He encouraged us not to fear supernatural things, such as ghosts, and
said they did no harm, but only wandered about because they were lonely
and distressed and wanted kindly notice and compassion; and in time we
learned not to be afraid, and even went down with him in the night to
the haunted chamber in the dungeons of the castle. The ghost appeared
only once, and it went by very dim to the sight and floated noiseless
through the air, and then disappeared; and we scarcely trembled, he had
taught us so well. He said it came up sometimes in the night and woke
him by passing its clammy hand over his face, but it did him no hurt; it
only wanted sympathy and notice. But the strangest thing was that he had
seen angels--actual angels out of heaven--and had talked with them. They
had no wings, and wore clothes, and talked and looked and acted just
like any natural person, and you would never know them for angels except
for the wonderful things they did which a mortal could not do, and the
way they suddenly disappeared while you were talking with them, which
was also a thing which no mortal could do. And he said they were
pleasant and cheerful, not gloomy and melancholy, like ghosts.

It was after that kind of a talk one May night that we got up next
morning and had a good breakfast with him and then went down and crossed
the bridge and went away up into the hills on the left to a woody
hill-top which was a favorite place of ours, and there we stretched out
on the grass in the shade to rest and smoke and talk over these strange
things, for they were in our minds yet, and impressing us. But we
couldn't smoke, because we had been heedless and left our flint and
steel behind.

Soon there came a youth strolling toward us through the trees, and he
sat down and began to talk in a friendly way, just as if he knew us.
But we did not answer him, for he was a stranger and we were not used to
strangers and were shy of them. He had new and good clothes on, and was
handsome and had a winning face and a pleasant voice, and was easy and
graceful and unembarrassed, not slouchy and awkward and diffident, like
other boys. We wanted to be friendly with him, but didn't know how to
begin. Then I thought of the pipe, and wondered if it would be taken
as kindly meant if I offered it to him. But I remembered that we had
no fire, so I was sorry and disappointed. But he looked up bright and
pleased, and said:

“Fire? Oh, that is easy; I will furnish it.”

I was so astonished I couldn't speak; for I had not said anything. He
took the pipe and blew his breath on it, and the tobacco glowed red, and
spirals of blue smoke rose up. We jumped up and were going to run, for
that was natural; and we did run a few steps, although he was yearningly
pleading for us to stay, and giving us his word that he would not do us
any harm, but only wanted to be friends with us and have company. So we
stopped and stood, and wanted to go back, being full of curiosity
and wonder, but afraid to venture. He went on coaxing, in his soft,
persuasive way; and when we saw that the pipe did not blow up and
nothing happened, our confidence returned by little and little, and
presently our curiosity got to be stronger than our fear, and we
ventured back--but slowly, and ready to fly at any alarm.

He was bent on putting us at ease, and he had the right art; one could
not remain doubtful and timorous where a person was so earnest and
simple and gentle, and talked so alluringly as he did; no, he won us
over, and it was not long before we were content and comfortable and
chatty, and glad we had found this new friend. When the feeling of
constraint was all gone we asked him how he had learned to do that
strange thing, and he said he hadn't learned it at all; it came natural
to him--like other things--other curious things.

“What ones?”

“Oh, a number; I don't know how many.”

“Will you let us see you do them?”

“Do--please!” the others said.

“You won't run away again?”

“No--indeed we won't. Please do. Won't you?”

“Yes, with pleasure; but you mustn't forget your promise, you know.”

We said we wouldn't, and he went to a puddle and came back with water
in a cup which he had made out of a leaf, and blew upon it and threw it
out, and it was a lump of ice the shape of the cup. We were astonished
and charmed, but not afraid any more; we were very glad to be there, and
asked him to go on and do some more things. And he did. He said he would
give us any kind of fruit we liked, whether it was in season or not. We
all spoke at once;

“Orange!”

“Apple!”

“Grapes!”

“They are in your pockets,” he said, and it was true. And they were of
the best, too, and we ate them and wished we had more, though none of us
said so.

“You will find them where those came from,” he said, “and everything
else your appetites call for; and you need not name the thing you wish;
as long as I am with you, you have only to wish and find.”

And he said true. There was never anything so wonderful and so
interesting. Bread, cakes, sweets, nuts--whatever one wanted, it was
there. He ate nothing himself, but sat and chatted, and did one curious
thing after another to amuse us. He made a tiny toy squirrel out of
clay, and it ran up a tree and sat on a limb overhead and barked down
at us. Then he made a dog that was not much larger than a mouse, and it
treed the squirrel and danced about the tree, excited and barking, and
was as alive as any dog could be. It frightened the squirrel from tree
to tree and followed it up until both were out of sight in the forest.
He made birds out of clay and set them free, and they flew away,
singing.

At last I made bold to ask him to tell us who he was.

“An angel,” he said, quite simply, and set another bird free and clapped
his hands and made it fly away.

A kind of awe fell upon us when we heard him say that, and we were
afraid again; but he said we need not be troubled, there was no occasion
for us to be afraid of an angel, and he liked us, anyway. He went on
chatting as simply and unaffectedly as ever; and while he talked he made
a crowd of little men and women the size of your finger, and they went
diligently to work and cleared and leveled off a space a couple of yards
square in the grass and began to build a cunning little castle in it,
the women mixing the mortar and carrying it up the scaffoldings in pails
on their heads, just as our work-women have always done, and the men
laying the courses of masonry--five hundred of these toy people swarming
briskly about and working diligently and wiping the sweat off their
faces as natural as life. In the absorbing interest of watching those
five hundred little people make the castle grow step by step and course
by course, and take shape and symmetry, that feeling and awe soon passed
away and we were quite comfortable and at home again. We asked if we
might make some people, and he said yes, and told Seppi to make some
cannon for the walls, and told Nikolaus to make some halberdiers, with
breastplates and greaves and helmets, and I was to make some cavalry,
with horses, and in allotting these tasks he called us by our names,
but did not say how he knew them. Then Seppi asked him what his own name
was, and he said, tranquilly, “Satan,” and held out a chip and caught a
little woman on it who was falling from the scaffolding and put her back
where she belonged, and said, “She is an idiot to step backward like
that and not notice what she is about.”

It caught us suddenly, that name did, and our work dropped out of our
hands and broke to pieces--a cannon, a halberdier, and a horse. Satan
laughed, and asked what was the matter. I said, “Nothing, only it seemed
a strange name for an angel.” He asked why.

“Because it's--it's--well, it's his name, you know.”

“Yes--he is my uncle.”

He said it placidly, but it took our breath for a moment and made our
hearts beat. He did not seem to notice that, but mended our halberdiers
and things with a touch, handing them to us finished, and said, “Don't
you remember?--he was an angel himself, once.”

“Yes--it's true,” said Seppi; “I didn't think of that.”

“Before the Fall he was blameless.”

“Yes,” said Nikolaus, “he was without sin.”

“It is a good family--ours,” said Satan; “there is not a better. He is
the only member of it that has ever sinned.”

I should not be able to make any one understand how exciting it all was.
You know that kind of quiver that trembles around through you when you
are seeing something so strange and enchanting and wonderful that it
is just a fearful joy to be alive and look at it; and you know how
you gaze, and your lips turn dry and your breath comes short, but you
wouldn't be anywhere but there, not for the world. I was bursting to
ask one question--I had it on my tongue's end and could hardly hold it
back--but I was ashamed to ask it; it might be a rudeness. Satan set an
ox down that he had been making, and smiled up at me and said:

“It wouldn't be a rudeness, and I should forgive it if it was. Have I
seen him? Millions of times. From the time that I was a little child a
thousand years old I was his second favorite among the nursery angels of
our blood and lineage--to use a human phrase--yes, from that time until
the Fall, eight thousand years, measured as you count time.”

“Eight--thousand!”

“Yes.” He turned to Seppi, and went on as if answering something that
was in Seppi's mind: “Why, naturally I look like a boy, for that is what
I am. With us what you call time is a spacious thing; it takes a long
stretch of it to grow an angel to full age.” There was a question in my
mind, and he turned to me and answered it, “I am sixteen thousand years
old--counting as you count.” Then he turned to Nikolaus and said: “No,
the Fall did not affect me nor the rest of the relationship. It was
only he that I was named for who ate of the fruit of the tree and then
beguiled the man and the woman with it. We others are still ignorant
of sin; we are not able to commit it; we are without blemish, and
shall abide in that estate always. We--” Two of the little workmen were
quarreling, and in buzzing little bumblebee voices they were cursing
and swearing at each other; now came blows and blood; then they locked
themselves together in a life-and-death struggle. Satan reached out his
hand and crushed the life out of them with his fingers, threw them away,
wiped the red from his fingers on his handkerchief, and went on
talking where he had left off: “We cannot do wrong; neither have we any
disposition to do it, for we do not know what it is.”

It seemed a strange speech, in the circumstances, but we barely noticed
that, we were so shocked and grieved at the wanton murder he had
committed--for murder it was, that was its true name, and it was without
palliation or excuse, for the men had not wronged him in any way. It
made us miserable, for we loved him, and had thought him so noble and so
beautiful and gracious, and had honestly believed he was an angel; and
to have him do this cruel thing--ah, it lowered him so, and we had had
such pride in him. He went right on talking, just as if nothing had
happened, telling about his travels, and the interesting things he had
seen in the big worlds of our solar system and of other solar systems
far away in the remotenesses of space, and about the customs of the
immortals that inhabit them, somehow fascinating us, enchanting us,
charming us in spite of the pitiful scene that was now under our eyes,
for the wives of the little dead men had found the crushed and shapeless
bodies and were crying over them, and sobbing and lamenting, and a
priest was kneeling there with his hands crossed upon his breast,
praying; and crowds and crowds of pitying friends were massed about
them, reverently uncovered, with their bare heads bowed, and many with
the tears running down--a scene which Satan paid no attention to until
the small noise of the weeping and praying began to annoy him, then he
reached out and took the heavy board seat out of our swing and brought
it down and mashed all those people into the earth just as if they had
been flies, and went on talking just the same. An angel, and kill a
priest! An angel who did not know how to do wrong, and yet destroys in
cold blood hundreds of helpless poor men and women who had never done
him any harm! It made us sick to see that awful deed, and to think that
none of those poor creatures was prepared except the priest, for none of
them had ever heard a mass or seen a church. And we were witnesses; we
had seen these murders done and it was our duty to tell, and let the law
take its course.

But he went on talking right along, and worked his enchantments upon us
again with that fatal music of his voice. He made us forget everything;
we could only listen to him, and love him, and be his slaves, to do with
us as he would. He made us drunk with the joy of being with him, and
of looking into the heaven of his eyes, and of feeling the ecstasy that
thrilled along our veins from the touch of his hand.


Chapter 3

The Stranger had seen everything, he had been everywhere, he knew
everything, and he forgot nothing. What another must study, he learned
at a glance; there were no difficulties for him. And he made things live
before you when he told about them. He saw the world made; he saw Adam
created; he saw Samson surge against the pillars and bring the temple
down in ruins about him; he saw Caesar's death; he told of the daily
life in heaven; he had seen the damned writhing in the red waves of
hell; and he made us see all these things, and it was as if we were on
the spot and looking at them with our own eyes. And we felt them,
too, but there was no sign that they were anything to him beyond mere
entertainments. Those visions of hell, those poor babes and women and
girls and lads and men shrieking and supplicating in anguish--why, we
could hardly bear it, but he was as bland about it as if it had been so
many imitation rats in an artificial fire.

And always when he was talking about men and women here on the earth
and their doings--even their grandest and sublimest--we were secretly
ashamed, for his manner showed that to him they and their doings were
of paltry poor consequence; often you would think he was talking about
flies, if you didn't know. Once he even said, in so many words, that
our people down here were quite interesting to him, notwithstanding they
were so dull and ignorant and trivial and conceited, and so diseased and
rickety, and such a shabby, poor, worthless lot all around. He said it
in a quite matter-of-course way and without bitterness, just as a person
might talk about bricks or manure or any other thing that was of no
consequence and hadn't feelings. I could see he meant no offense, but in
my thoughts I set it down as not very good manners.

“Manners!” he said. “Why, it is merely the truth, and truth is good
manners; manners are a fiction. The castle is done. Do you like it?”

Any one would have been obliged to like it. It was lovely to look at,
it was so shapely and fine, and so cunningly perfect in all its
particulars, even to the little flags waving from the turrets. Satan
said we must put the artillery in place now, and station the halberdiers
and display the cavalry. Our men and horses were a spectacle to see,
they were so little like what they were intended for; for, of course, we
had no art in making such things. Satan said they were the worst he
had seen; and when he touched them and made them alive, it was just
ridiculous the way they acted, on account of their legs not being of
uniform lengths. They reeled and sprawled around as if they were drunk,
and endangered everybody's lives around them, and finally fell over and
lay helpless and kicking. It made us all laugh, though it was a shameful
thing to see. The guns were charged with dirt, to fire a salute, but
they were so crooked and so badly made that they all burst when they
went off, and killed some of the gunners and crippled the others. Satan
said we would have a storm now, and an earthquake, if we liked, but
we must stand off a piece, out of danger. We wanted to call the people
away, too, but he said never mind them; they were of no consequence, and
we could make more, some time or other, if we needed them.

A small storm-cloud began to settle down black over the castle, and the
miniature lightning and thunder began to play, and the ground to quiver,
and the wind to pipe and wheeze, and the rain to fall, and all the
people flocked into the castle for shelter. The cloud settled down
blacker and blacker, and one could see the castle only dimly through it;
the lightning blazed out flash upon flash and pierced the castle and set
it on fire, and the flames shone out red and fierce through the cloud,
and the people came flying out, shrieking, but Satan brushed them back,
paying no attention to our begging and crying and imploring; and in
the midst of the howling of the wind and volleying of the thunder the
magazine blew up, the earthquake rent the ground wide, and the castle's
wreck and ruin tumbled into the chasm, which swallowed it from sight,
and closed upon it, with all that innocent life, not one of the five
hundred poor creatures escaping. Our hearts were broken; we could not
keep from crying.

“Don't cry,” Satan said; “they were of no value.”

“But they are gone to hell!”

“Oh, it is no matter; we can make plenty more.”

It was of no use to try to move him; evidently he was wholly without
feelings, and could not understand. He was full of bubbling spirits, and
as gay as if this were a wedding instead of a fiendish massacre. And
he was bent on making us feel as he did, and of course his magic
accomplished his desire. It was no trouble to him; he did whatever he
pleased with us. In a little while we were dancing on that grave, and
he was playing to us on a strange, sweet instrument which he took out
of his pocket; and the music--but there is no music like that, unless
perhaps in heaven, and that was where he brought it from, he said. It
made one mad, for pleasure; and we could not take our eyes from him, and
the looks that went out of our eyes came from our hearts, and their dumb
speech was worship. He brought the dance from heaven, too, and the bliss
of paradise was in it.

Presently he said he must go away on an errand. But we could not bear
the thought of it, and clung to him, and pleaded with him to stay; and
that pleased him, and he said so, and said he would not go yet, but
would wait a little while and we would sit down and talk a few minutes
longer; and he told us Satan was only his real name, and he was to be
known by it to us alone, but he had chosen another one to be called
by in the presence of others; just a common one, such as people
have--Philip Traum.

It sounded so odd and mean for such a being! But it was his decision,
and we said nothing; his decision was sufficient.

We had seen wonders this day; and my thoughts began to run on the
pleasure it would be to tell them when I got home, but he noticed those
thoughts, and said:

“No, all these matters are a secret among us four. I do not mind your
trying to tell them, if you like, but I will protect your tongues, and
nothing of the secret will escape from them.”

It was a disappointment, but it couldn't be helped, and it cost us a
sigh or two. We talked pleasantly along, and he was always reading our
thoughts and responding to them, and it seemed to me that this was the
most wonderful of all the things he did, but he interrupted my musings
and said:

“No, it would be wonderful for you, but it is not wonderful for me. I
am not limited like you. I am not subject to human conditions. I can
measure and understand your human weaknesses, for I have studied them;
but I have none of them. My flesh is not real, although it would seem
firm to your touch; my clothes are not real; I am a spirit. Father Peter
is coming.” We looked around, but did not see any one. “He is not in
sight yet, but you will see him presently.”

“Do you know him, Satan?”

“No.”

“Won't you talk with him when he comes? He is not ignorant and dull,
like us, and he would so like to talk with you. Will you?”

“Another time, yes, but not now. I must go on my errand after a little.
There he is now; you can see him. Sit still, and don't say anything.”

We looked up and saw Father Peter approaching through the chestnuts. We
three were sitting together in the grass, and Satan sat in front of
us in the path. Father Peter came slowly along with his head down,
thinking, and stopped within a couple of yards of us and took off his
hat and got out his silk handkerchief, and stood there mopping his face
and looking as if he were going to speak to us, but he didn't. Presently
he muttered, “I can't think what brought me here; it seems as if I were
in my study a minute ago--but I suppose I have been dreaming along for
an hour and have come all this stretch without noticing; for I am not
myself in these troubled days.” Then he went mumbling along to himself
and walked straight through Satan, just as if nothing were there. It
made us catch our breath to see it. We had the impulse to cry out, the
way you nearly always do when a startling thing happens, but something
mysteriously restrained us and we remained quiet, only breathing fast.
Then the trees hid Father Peter after a little, and Satan said:

“It is as I told you--I am only a spirit.”

“Yes, one perceives it now,” said Nikolaus, “but we are not spirits. It
is plain he did not see you, but were we invisible, too? He looked at
us, but he didn't seem to see us.”

“No, none of us was visible to him, for I wished it so.”

It seemed almost too good to be true, that we were actually seeing these
romantic and wonderful things, and that it was not a dream. And there he
sat, looking just like anybody--so natural and simple and charming, and
chatting along again the same as ever, and--well, words cannot make you
understand what we felt. It was an ecstasy; and an ecstasy is a thing
that will not go into words; it feels like music, and one cannot tell
about music so that another person can get the feeling of it. He was
back in the old ages once more now, and making them live before us. He
had seen so much, so much! It was just a wonder to look at him and try
to think how it must seem to have such experience behind one.

But it made you seem sorrowfully trivial, and the creature of a day, and
such a short and paltry day, too. And he didn't say anything to raise up
your drooping pride--no, not a word. He always spoke of men in the same
old indifferent way--just as one speaks of bricks and manure-piles and
such things; you could see that they were of no consequence to him, one
way or the other. He didn't mean to hurt us, you could see that; just as
we don't mean to insult a brick when we disparage it; a brick's emotions
are nothing to us; it never occurs to us to think whether it has any or
not.

Once when he was bunching the most illustrious kings and conquerors
and poets and prophets and pirates and beggars together--just a
brick-pile--I was shamed into putting in a word for man, and asked
him why he made so much difference between men and himself. He had to
struggle with that a moment; he didn't seem to understand how I could
ask such a strange question. Then he said:

“The difference between man and me? The difference between a mortal and
an immortal? between a cloud and a spirit?” He picked up a wood-louse
that was creeping along a piece of bark: “What is the difference between
Caesar and this?”

I said, “One cannot compare things which by their nature and by the
interval between them are not comparable.”

“You have answered your own question,” he said. “I will expand it. Man
is made of dirt--I saw him made. I am not made of dirt. Man is a
museum of diseases, a home of impurities; he comes to-day and is
gone to-morrow; he begins as dirt and departs as stench; I am of the
aristocracy of the Imperishables. And man has the Moral Sense. You
understand? He has the moral Sense. That would seem to be difference
enough between us, all by itself.”

He stopped there, as if that settled the matter. I was sorry, for at
that time I had but a dim idea of what the Moral Sense was. I merely
knew that we were proud of having it, and when he talked like that about
it, it wounded me, and I felt as a girl feels who thinks her dearest
finery is being admired and then overhears strangers making fun of it.
For a while we were all silent, and I, for one, was depressed. Then
Satan began to chat again, and soon he was sparkling along in such a
cheerful and vivacious vein that my spirits rose once more. He told some
very cunning things that put us in a gale of laughter; and when he was
telling about the time that Samson tied the torches to the foxes' tails
and set them loose in the Philistines' corn, and Samson sitting on the
fence slapping his thighs and laughing, with the tears running down his
cheeks, and lost his balance and fell off the fence, the memory of that
picture got him to laughing, too, and we did have a most lovely and
jolly time. By and by he said:

“I am going on my errand now.”

“Don't!” we all said. “Don't go; stay with us. You won't come back.”

“Yes, I will; I give you my word.”

“When? To-night? Say when.”

“It won't be long. You will see.”

“We like you.”

“And I you. And as a proof of it I will show you something fine to see.
Usually when I go I merely vanish; but now I will dissolve myself and
let you see me do it.”

He stood up, and it was quickly finished. He thinned away and thinned
away until he was a soap-bubble, except that he kept his shape. You
could see the bushes through him as clearly as you see things through a
soap-bubble, and all over him played and flashed the delicate iridescent
colors of the bubble, and along with them was that thing shaped like a
window-sash which you always see on the globe of the bubble. You have
seen a bubble strike the carpet and lightly bound along two or
three times before it bursts. He did that. He sprang--touched the
grass--bounded--floated along--touched again--and so on, and presently
exploded--puff! and in his place was vacancy.

It was a strange and beautiful thing to see. We did not say anything,
but sat wondering and dreaming and blinking; and finally Seppi roused up
and said, mournfully sighing:

“I suppose none of it has happened.”

Nikolaus sighed and said about the same.

I was miserable to hear them say it, for it was the same cold fear that
was in my own mind. Then we saw poor old Father Peter wandering along
back, with his head bent down, searching the ground. When he was pretty
close to us he looked up and saw us, and said, “How long have you been
here, boys?”

“A little while, Father.”

“Then it is since I came by, and maybe you can help me. Did you come up
by the path?”

“Yes, Father.”

“That is good. I came the same way. I have lost my wallet. There wasn't
much in it, but a very little is much to me, for it was all I had. I
suppose you haven't seen anything of it?”

“No, Father, but we will help you hunt.”

“It is what I was going to ask you. Why, here it is!”

We hadn't noticed it; yet there it lay, right where Satan stood when
he began to melt--if he did melt and it wasn't a delusion. Father Peter
picked it up and looked very much surprised.

“It is mine,” he said, “but not the contents. This is fat; mine was
flat; mine was light; this is heavy.” He opened it; it was stuffed as
full as it could hold with gold coins. He let us gaze our fill; and
of course we did gaze, for we had never seen so much money at one time
before. All our mouths came open to say “Satan did it!” but nothing
came out. There it was, you see--we couldn't tell what Satan didn't want
told; he had said so himself.

“Boys, did you do this?”

It made us laugh. And it made him laugh, too, as soon as he thought what
a foolish question it was.

“Who has been here?”

Our mouths came open to answer, but stood so for a moment, because
we couldn't say “Nobody,” for it wouldn't be true, and the right word
didn't seem to come; then I thought of the right one, and said it:

“Not a human being.”

“That is so,” said the others, and let their mouths go shut.

“It is not so,” said Father Peter, and looked at us very severely.
“I came by here a while ago, and there was no one here, but that is
nothing; some one has been here since. I don't mean to say that the
person didn't pass here before you came, and I don't mean to say you saw
him, but some one did pass, that I know. On your honor--you saw no one?”

“Not a human being.”

“That is sufficient; I know you are telling me the truth.”

He began to count the money on the path, we on our knees eagerly helping
to stack it in little piles.

“It's eleven hundred ducats odd!” he said. “Oh dear! if it were only
mine--and I need it so!” and his voice broke and his lips quivered.

“It is yours, sir!” we all cried out at once, “every heller!”

“No--it isn't mine. Only four ducats are mine; the rest...!” He fell to
dreaming, poor old soul, and caressing some of the coins in his hands,
and forgot where he was, sitting there on his heels with his old gray
head bare; it was pitiful to see. “No,” he said, waking up, “it isn't
mine. I can't account for it. I think some enemy... it must be a trap.”

Nikolaus said: “Father Peter, with the exception of the astrologer you
haven't a real enemy in the village--nor Marget, either. And not even a
half-enemy that's rich enough to chance eleven hundred ducats to do you
a mean turn. I'll ask you if that's so or not?”

He couldn't get around that argument, and it cheered him up. “But it
isn't mine, you see--it isn't mine, in any case.”

He said it in a wistful way, like a person that wouldn't be sorry, but
glad, if anybody would contradict him.

“It is yours, Father Peter, and we are witness to it. Aren't we, boys?”

“Yes, we are--and we'll stand by it, too.”

“Bless your hearts, you do almost persuade me; you do, indeed. If I
had only a hundred-odd ducats of it! The house is mortgaged for it, and
we've no home for our heads if we don't pay to-morrow. And that four
ducats is all we've got in the--”

“It's yours, every bit of it, and you've got to take it--we are bail
that it's all right. Aren't we, Theodor? Aren't we, Seppi?”

We two said yes, and Nikolaus stuffed the money back into the shabby old
wallet and made the owner take it. So he said he would use two hundred
of it, for his house was good enough security for that, and would put
the rest at interest till the rightful owner came for it; and on our
side we must sign a paper showing how he got the money--a paper to
show to the villagers as proof that he had not got out of his troubles
dishonestly.


Chapter 4

It made immense talk next day, when Father Peter paid Solomon Isaacs in
gold and left the rest of the money with him at interest. Also, there
was a pleasant change; many people called at the house to congratulate
him, and a number of cool old friends became kind and friendly again;
and, to top all, Marget was invited to a party.

And there was no mystery; Father Peter told the whole circumstance just
as it happened, and said he could not account for it, only it was the
plain hand of Providence, so far as he could see.

One or two shook their heads and said privately it looked more like
the hand of Satan; and really that seemed a surprisingly good guess for
ignorant people like that. Some came slyly buzzing around and tried
to coax us boys to come out and “tell the truth;” and promised they
wouldn't ever tell, but only wanted to know for their own satisfaction,
because the whole thing was so curious. They even wanted to buy the
secret, and pay money for it; and if we could have invented something
that would answer--but we couldn't; we hadn't the ingenuity, so we had
to let the chance go by, and it was a pity.

We carried that secret around without any trouble, but the other one,
the big one, the splendid one, burned the very vitals of us, it was so
hot to get out and we so hot to let it out and astonish people with
it. But we had to keep it in; in fact, it kept itself in. Satan said
it would, and it did. We went off every day and got to ourselves in the
woods so that we could talk about Satan, and really that was the only
subject we thought of or cared anything about; and day and night we
watched for him and hoped he would come, and we got more and more
impatient all the time. We hadn't any interest in the other boys any
more, and wouldn't take part in their games and enterprises. They seemed
so tame, after Satan; and their doings so trifling and commonplace after
his adventures in antiquity and the constellations, and his miracles and
meltings and explosions, and all that.

During the first day we were in a state of anxiety on account of one
thing, and we kept going to Father Peter's house on one pretext or
another to keep track of it. That was the gold coin; we were afraid
it would crumble and turn to dust, like fairy money. If it did--But it
didn't. At the end of the day no complaint had been made about it, so
after that we were satisfied that it was real gold, and dropped the
anxiety out of our minds.

There was a question which we wanted to ask Father Peter, and finally
we went there the second evening, a little diffidently, after drawing
straws, and I asked it as casually as I could, though it did not sound
as casual as I wanted, because I didn't know how:

“What is the Moral Sense, sir?”

He looked down, surprised, over his great spectacles, and said, “Why, it
is the faculty which enables us to distinguish good from evil.”

It threw some light, but not a glare, and I was a little disappointed,
also to some degree embarrassed. He was waiting for me to go on, so, in
default of anything else to say, I asked, “Is it valuable?”

“Valuable? Heavens! lad, it is the one thing that lifts man above the
beasts that perish and makes him heir to immortality!”

This did not remind me of anything further to say, so I got out, with
the other boys, and we went away with that indefinite sense you have
often had of being filled but not fatted. They wanted me to explain, but
I was tired.

We passed out through the parlor, and there was Marget at the spinnet
teaching Marie Lueger. So one of the deserting pupils was back; and an
influential one, too; the others would follow. Marget jumped up and
ran and thanked us again, with tears in her eyes--this was the third
time--for saving her and her uncle from being turned into the street,
and we told her again we hadn't done it; but that was her way, she never
could be grateful enough for anything a person did for her; so we let
her have her say. And as we passed through the garden, there was Wilhelm
Meidling sitting there waiting, for it was getting toward the edge of
the evening, and he would be asking Marget to take a walk along the
river with him when she was done with the lesson. He was a young lawyer,
and succeeding fairly well and working his way along, little by little.
He was very fond of Marget, and she of him. He had not deserted along
with the others, but had stood his ground all through. His faithfulness
was not lost on Marget and her uncle. He hadn't so very much talent, but
he was handsome and good, and these are a kind of talents themselves and
help along. He asked us how the lesson was getting along, and we told
him it was about done. And maybe it was so; we didn't know anything
about it, but we judged it would please him, and it did, and didn't cost
us anything.


Chapter 5

On the fourth day comes the astrologer from his crumbling old tower up
the valley, where he had heard the news, I reckon. He had a private talk
with us, and we told him what we could, for we were mightily in dread
of him. He sat there studying and studying awhile to himself; then he
asked:

“How many ducats did you say?”

“Eleven hundred and seven, sir.”

Then he said, as if he were talking to himself: “It is ver-y singular.
Yes... very strange. A curious coincidence.” Then he began to ask
questions, and went over the whole ground from the beginning, we
answering. By and by he said: “Eleven hundred and six ducats. It is a
large sum.”

“Seven,” said Seppi, correcting him.

“Oh, seven, was it? Of course a ducat more or less isn't of consequence,
but you said eleven hundred and six before.”

It would not have been safe for us to say he was mistaken, but we knew
he was. Nikolaus said, “We ask pardon for the mistake, but we meant to
say seven.”

“Oh, it is no matter, lad; it was merely that I noticed the discrepancy.
It is several days, and you cannot be expected to remember precisely.
One is apt to be inexact when there is no particular circumstance to
impress the count upon the memory.”

“But there was one, sir,” said Seppi, eagerly.

“What was it, my son?” asked the astrologer, indifferently.

“First, we all counted the piles of coin, each in turn, and all made it
the same--eleven hundred and six. But I had slipped one out, for fun,
when the count began, and now I slipped it back and said, 'I think there
is a mistake--there are eleven hundred and seven; let us count again.'
We did, and of course I was right. They were astonished; then I told how
it came about.”

The astrologer asked us if this was so, and we said it was.

“That settles it,” he said. “I know the thief now. Lads, the money was
stolen.”

Then he went away, leaving us very much troubled, and wondering what he
could mean. In about an hour we found out; for by that time it was all
over the village that Father Peter had been arrested for stealing a
great sum of money from the astrologer. Everybody's tongue was loose and
going. Many said it was not in Father Peter's character and must be a
mistake; but the others shook their heads and said misery and want could
drive a suffering man to almost anything. About one detail there were
no differences; all agreed that Father Peter's account of how the
money came into his hands was just about unbelievable--it had such an
impossible look. They said it might have come into the astrologer's
hands in some such way, but into Father Peter's, never! Our characters
began to suffer now. We were Father Peter's only witnesses; how much
did he probably pay us to back up his fantastic tale? People talked that
kind of talk to us pretty freely and frankly, and were full of scoffings
when we begged them to believe really we had told only the truth. Our
parents were harder on us than any one else. Our fathers said we were
disgracing our families, and they commanded us to purge ourselves of our
lie, and there was no limit to their anger when we continued to say we
had spoken true. Our mothers cried over us and begged us to give back
our bribe and get back our honest names and save our families from
shame, and come out and honorably confess. And at last we were so
worried and harassed that we tried to tell the whole thing, Satan and
all--but no, it wouldn't come out. We were hoping and longing all the
time that Satan would come and help us out of our trouble, but there was
no sign of him.

Within an hour after the astrologer's talk with us, Father Peter was in
prison and the money sealed up and in the hands of the officers of the
law. The money was in a bag, and Solomon Isaacs said he had not touched
it since he had counted it; his oath was taken that it was the same
money, and that the amount was eleven hundred and seven ducats. Father
Peter claimed trial by the ecclesiastical court, but our other priest,
Father Adolf, said an ecclesiastical court hadn't jurisdiction over a
suspended priest. The bishop upheld him. That settled it; the case would
go to trial in the civil court. The court would not sit for some time to
come. Wilhelm Meidling would be Father Peter's lawyer and do the best he
could, of course, but he told us privately that a weak case on his side
and all the power and prejudice on the other made the outlook bad.

So Marget's new happiness died a quick death. No friends came to
condole with her, and none were expected; an unsigned note withdrew her
invitation to the party. There would be no scholars to take lessons.
How could she support herself? She could remain in the house, for the
mortgage was paid off, though the government and not poor Solomon Isaacs
had the mortgage-money in its grip for the present. Old Ursula, who
was cook, chambermaid, housekeeper, laundress, and everything else for
Father Peter, and had been Marget's nurse in earlier years, said
God would provide. But she said that from habit, for she was a good
Christian. She meant to help in the providing, to make sure, if she
could find a way.

We boys wanted to go and see Marget and show friendliness for her, but
our parents were afraid of offending the community and wouldn't let
us. The astrologer was going around inflaming everybody against Father
Peter, and saying he was an abandoned thief and had stolen eleven
hundred and seven gold ducats from him. He said he knew he was a thief
from that fact, for it was exactly the sum he had lost and which Father
Peter pretended he had “found.”

In the afternoon of the fourth day after the catastrophe old Ursula
appeared at our house and asked for some washing to do, and begged my
mother to keep this secret, to save Marget's pride, who would stop this
project if she found it out, yet Marget had not enough to eat and was
growing weak. Ursula was growing weak herself, and showed it; and she
ate of the food that was offered her like a starving person, but could
not be persuaded to carry any home, for Marget would not eat charity
food. She took some clothes down to the stream to wash them, but we saw
from the window that handling the bat was too much for her strength;
so she was called back and a trifle of money offered her, which she was
afraid to take lest Marget should suspect; then she took it, saying she
would explain that she found it in the road. To keep it from being a lie
and damning her soul, she got me to drop it while she watched; then she
went along by there and found it, and exclaimed with surprise and joy,
and picked it up and went her way. Like the rest of the village, she
could tell every-day lies fast enough and without taking any precautions
against fire and brimstone on their account; but this was a new kind of
lie, and it had a dangerous look because she hadn't had any practice in
it. After a week's practice it wouldn't have given her any trouble. It
is the way we are made.

I was in trouble, for how would Marget live? Ursula could not find a
coin in the road every day--perhaps not even a second one. And I was
ashamed, too, for not having been near Marget, and she so in need of
friends; but that was my parents' fault, not mine, and I couldn't help
it.

I was walking along the path, feeling very down-hearted, when a most
cheery and tingling freshening-up sensation went rippling through me,
and I was too glad for any words, for I knew by that sign that Satan was
by. I had noticed it before. Next moment he was alongside of me and I
was telling him all my trouble and what had been happening to Marget and
her uncle. While we were talking we turned a curve and saw old Ursula
resting in the shade of a tree, and she had a lean stray kitten in her
lap and was petting it. I asked her where she got it, and she said it
came out of the woods and followed her; and she said it probably hadn't
any mother or any friends and she was going to take it home and take
care of it. Satan said:

“I understand you are very poor. Why do you want to add another mouth to
feed? Why don't you give it to some rich person?”

Ursula bridled at this and said: “Perhaps you would like to have it. You
must be rich, with your fine clothes and quality airs.” Then she sniffed
and said: “Give it to the rich--the idea! The rich don't care for
anybody but themselves; it's only the poor that have feeling for
the poor, and help them. The poor and God. God will provide for this
kitten.”

“What makes you think so?”

Ursula's eyes snapped with anger. “Because I know it!” she said. “Not a
sparrow falls to the ground without His seeing it.”

“But it falls, just the same. What good is seeing it fall?”

Old Ursula's jaws worked, but she could not get any word out for the
moment, she was so horrified. When she got her tongue, she stormed out,
“Go about your business, you puppy, or I will take a stick to you!”

I could not speak, I was so scared. I knew that with his notions about
the human race Satan would consider it a matter of no consequence to
strike her dead, there being “plenty more”; but my tongue stood still,
I could give her no warning. But nothing happened; Satan remained
tranquil--tranquil and indifferent. I suppose he could not be insulted
by Ursula any more than the king could be insulted by a tumble-bug. The
old woman jumped to her feet when she made her remark, and did it as
briskly as a young girl. It had been many years since she had done the
like of that. That was Satan's influence; he was a fresh breeze to the
weak and the sick, wherever he came. His presence affected even the lean
kitten, and it skipped to the ground and began to chase a leaf. This
surprised Ursula, and she stood looking at the creature and nodding her
head wonderingly, her anger quite forgotten.

“What's come over it?” she said. “Awhile ago it could hardly walk.”

“You have not seen a kitten of that breed before,” said Satan.

Ursula was not proposing to be friendly with the mocking stranger, and
she gave him an ungentle look and retorted: “Who asked you to come here
and pester me, I'd like to know? And what do you know about what I've
seen and what I haven't seen?”

“You haven't seen a kitten with the hair-spines on its tongue pointing
to the front, have you?”

“No--nor you, either.”

“Well, examine this one and see.”

Ursula was become pretty spry, but the kitten was spryer, and she could
not catch it, and had to give it up. Then Satan said:

“Give it a name, and maybe it will come.”

Ursula tried several names, but the kitten was not interested.

“Call it Agnes. Try that.”

The creature answered to the name and came. Ursula examined its tongue.
“Upon my word, it's true!” she said. “I have not seen this kind of a cat
before. Is it yours?”

“No.”

“Then how did you know its name so pat?”

“Because all cats of that breed are named Agnes; they will not answer to
any other.”

Ursula was impressed. “It is the most wonderful thing!” Then a shadow of
trouble came into her face, for her superstitions were aroused, and she
reluctantly put the creature down, saying: “I suppose I must let it go;
I am not afraid--no, not exactly that, though the priest--well, I've
heard people--indeed, many people... And, besides, it is quite well now
and can take care of itself.” She sighed, and turned to go, murmuring:
“It is such a pretty one, too, and would be such company--and the house
is so sad and lonesome these troubled days... Miss Marget so mournful
and just a shadow, and the old master shut up in jail.”

“It seems a pity not to keep it,” said Satan.

Ursula turned quickly--just as if she were hoping some one would
encourage her.

“Why?” she asked, wistfully.

“Because this breed brings luck.”

“Does it? Is it true? Young man, do you know it to be true? How does it
bring luck?”

“Well, it brings money, anyway.”

Ursula looked disappointed. “Money? A cat bring money? The idea! You
could never sell it here; people do not buy cats here; one can't even
give them away.” She turned to go.

“I don't mean sell it. I mean have an income from it. This kind is
called the Lucky Cat. Its owner finds four silver groschen in his pocket
every morning.”

I saw the indignation rising in the old woman's face. She was insulted.
This boy was making fun of her. That was her thought. She thrust her
hands into her pockets and straightened up to give him a piece of her
mind. Her temper was all up, and hot. Her mouth came open and let out
three words of a bitter sentence,... then it fell silent, and the anger
in her face turned to surprise or wonder or fear, or something, and she
slowly brought out her hands from her pockets and opened them and held
them so. In one was my piece of money, in the other lay four silver
groschen. She gazed a little while, perhaps to see if the groschen would
vanish away; then she said, fervently:

“It's true--it's true--and I'm ashamed and beg forgiveness, O dear
master and benefactor!” And she ran to Satan and kissed his hand, over
and over again, according to the Austrian custom.

In her heart she probably believed it was a witch-cat and an agent of
the Devil; but no matter, it was all the more certain to be able to
keep its contract and furnish a daily good living for the family, for
in matters of finance even the piousest of our peasants would have more
confidence in an arrangement with the Devil than with an archangel.
Ursula started homeward, with Agnes in her arms, and I said I wished I
had her privilege of seeing Marget.

Then I caught my breath, for we were there. There in the parlor, and
Marget standing looking at us, astonished. She was feeble and pale, but
I knew that those conditions would not last in Satan's atmosphere, and
it turned out so. I introduced Satan--that is, Philip Traum--and we sat
down and talked. There was no constraint. We were simple folk, in our
village, and when a stranger was a pleasant person we were soon friends.
Marget wondered how we got in without her hearing us. Traum said the
door was open, and we walked in and waited until she should turn around
and greet us. This was not true; no door was open; we entered through
the walls or the roof or down the chimney, or somehow; but no matter,
what Satan wished a person to believe, the person was sure to believe,
and so Marget was quite satisfied with that explanation. And then the
main part of her mind was on Traum, anyway; she couldn't keep her eyes
off him, he was so beautiful. That gratified me, and made me proud. I
hoped he would show off some, but he didn't. He seemed only interested
in being friendly and telling lies. He said he was an orphan. That made
Marget pity him. The water came into her eyes. He said he had never
known his mamma; she passed away while he was a young thing; and said
his papa was in shattered health, and had no property to speak of--in
fact, none of any earthly value--but he had an uncle in business down
in the tropics, and he was very well off and had a monopoly, and it was
from this uncle that he drew his support. The very mention of a kind
uncle was enough to remind Marget of her own, and her eyes filled again.
She said she hoped their two uncles would meet, some day. It made me
shudder. Philip said he hoped so, too; and that made me shudder again.

“Maybe they will,” said Marget. “Does your uncle travel much?”

“Oh yes, he goes all about; he has business everywhere.”

And so they went on chatting, and poor Marget forgot her sorrow for one
little while, anyway. It was probably the only really bright and cheery
hour she had known lately. I saw she liked Philip, and I knew she would.
And when he told her he was studying for the ministry I could see that
she liked him better than ever. And then, when he promised to get her
admitted to the jail so that she could see her uncle, that was the
capstone. He said he would give the guards a little present, and she
must always go in the evening after dark, and say nothing, “but just
show this paper and pass in, and show it again when you come out”--and
he scribbled some queer marks on the paper and gave it to her, and she
was ever so thankful, and right away was in a fever for the sun to go
down; for in that old, cruel time prisoners were not allowed to see
their friends, and sometimes they spent years in the jails without ever
seeing a friendly face. I judged that the marks on the paper were an
enchantment, and that the guards would not know what they were doing,
nor have any memory of it afterward; and that was indeed the way of it.
Ursula put her head in at the door now and said:

“Supper's ready, miss.” Then she saw us and looked frightened, and
motioned me to come to her, which I did, and she asked if we had told
about the cat. I said no, and she was relieved, and said please don't;
for if Miss Marget knew, she would think it was an unholy cat and would
send for a priest and have its gifts all purified out of it, and then
there wouldn't be any more dividends. So I said we wouldn't tell, and
she was satisfied. Then I was beginning to say good-by to Marget, but
Satan interrupted and said, ever so politely--well, I don't remember
just the words, but anyway he as good as invited himself to supper,
and me, too. Of course Marget was miserably embarrassed, for she had
no reason to suppose there would be half enough for a sick bird. Ursula
heard him, and she came straight into the room, not a bit pleased. At
first she was astonished to see Marget looking so fresh and rosy, and
said so; then she spoke up in her native tongue, which was Bohemian, and
said--as I learned afterward--“Send him away, Miss Marget; there's not
victuals enough.”

Before Marget could speak, Satan had the word, and was talking back to
Ursula in her own language--which was a surprise to her, and for her
mistress, too. He said, “Didn't I see you down the road awhile ago?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Ah, that pleases me; I see you remember me.” He stepped to her and
whispered: “I told you it is a Lucky Cat. Don't be troubled; it will
provide.”

That sponged the slate of Ursula's feelings clean of its anxieties, and
a deep, financial joy shone in her eyes. The cat's value was augmenting.
It was getting full time for Marget to take some sort of notice of
Satan's invitation, and she did it in the best way, the honest way that
was natural to her. She said she had little to offer, but that we were
welcome if we would share it with her.

We had supper in the kitchen, and Ursula waited at table. A small fish
was in the frying-pan, crisp and brown and tempting, and one could see
that Marget was not expecting such respectable food as this. Ursula
brought it, and Marget divided it between Satan and me, declining to
take any of it herself; and was beginning to say she did not care for
fish to-day, but she did not finish the remark. It was because she
noticed that another fish had appeared in the pan. She looked surprised,
but did not say anything. She probably meant to inquire of Ursula about
this later. There were other surprises: flesh and game and wines and
fruits--things which had been strangers in that house lately; but Marget
made no exclamations, and now even looked unsurprised, which was Satan's
influence, of course. Satan talked right along, and was entertaining,
and made the time pass pleasantly and cheerfully; and although he told a
good many lies, it was no harm in him, for he was only an angel and did
not know any better. They do not know right from wrong; I knew this,
because I remembered what he had said about it. He got on the good side
of Ursula. He praised her to Marget, confidentially, but speaking just
loud enough for Ursula to hear. He said she was a fine woman, and he
hoped some day to bring her and his uncle together. Very soon Ursula was
mincing and simpering around in a ridiculous girly way, and smoothing
out her gown and prinking at herself like a foolish old hen, and all
the time pretending she was not hearing what Satan was saying. I was
ashamed, for it showed us to be what Satan considered us, a silly race
and trivial. Satan said his uncle entertained a great deal, and to
have a clever woman presiding over the festivities would double the
attractions of the place.

“But your uncle is a gentleman, isn't he?” asked Marget.

“Yes,” said Satan indifferently; “some even call him a Prince, out of
compliment, but he is not bigoted; to him personal merit is everything,
rank nothing.”

My hand was hanging down by my chair; Agnes came along and licked it; by
this act a secret was revealed. I started to say, “It is all a mistake;
this is just a common, ordinary cat; the hair-needles on her tongue
point inward, not outward.” But the words did not come, because they
couldn't. Satan smiled upon me, and I understood.

When it was dark Marget took food and wine and fruit, in a basket, and
hurried away to the jail, and Satan and I walked toward my home. I was
thinking to myself that I should like to see what the inside of the jail
was like; Satan overheard the thought, and the next moment we were
in the jail. We were in the torture-chamber, Satan said. The rack was
there, and the other instruments, and there was a smoky lantern or
two hanging on the walls and helping to make the place look dim and
dreadful. There were people there--and executioners--but as they took
no notice of us, it meant that we were invisible. A young man lay bound,
and Satan said he was suspected of being a heretic, and the executioners
were about to inquire into it. They asked the man to confess to the
charge, and he said he could not, for it was not true. Then they drove
splinter after splinter under his nails, and he shrieked with the
pain. Satan was not disturbed, but I could not endure it, and had to be
whisked out of there. I was faint and sick, but the fresh air revived
me, and we walked toward my home. I said it was a brutal thing.

“No, it was a human thing. You should not insult the brutes by such a
misuse of that word; they have not deserved it,” and he went on talking
like that. “It is like your paltry race--always lying, always claiming
virtues which it hasn't got, always denying them to the higher animals,
which alone possess them. No brute ever does a cruel thing--that is the
monopoly of those with the Moral Sense. When a brute inflicts pain he
does it innocently; it is not wrong; for him there is no such thing
as wrong. And he does not inflict pain for the pleasure of inflicting
it--only man does that. Inspired by that mongrel Moral Sense of his!
A sense whose function is to distinguish between right and wrong, with
liberty to choose which of them he will do. Now what advantage can he
get out of that? He is always choosing, and in nine cases out of ten he
prefers the wrong. There shouldn't be any wrong; and without the Moral
Sense there couldn't be any. And yet he is such an unreasoning creature
that he is not able to perceive that the Moral Sense degrades him to the
bottom layer of animated beings and is a shameful possession. Are you
feeling better? Let me show you something.”


Chapter 6

In a moment we were in a French village. We walked through a great
factory of some sort, where men and women and little children were
toiling in heat and dirt and a fog of dust; and they were clothed in
rags, and drooped at their work, for they were worn and half starved,
and weak and drowsy. Satan said:

“It is some more Moral Sense. The proprietors are rich, and very holy;
but the wage they pay to these poor brothers and sisters of theirs is
only enough to keep them from dropping dead with hunger. The work-hours
are fourteen per day, winter and summer--from six in the morning till
eight at night--little children and all. And they walk to and from the
pigsties which they inhabit--four miles each way, through mud and slush,
rain, snow, sleet, and storm, daily, year in and year out. They get
four hours of sleep. They kennel together, three families in a room, in
unimaginable filth and stench; and disease comes, and they die off like
flies. Have they committed a crime, these mangy things? No. What have
they done, that they are punished so? Nothing at all, except getting
themselves born into your foolish race. You have seen how they treat a
misdoer there in the jail; now you see how they treat the innocent
and the worthy. Is your race logical? Are these ill-smelling innocents
better off than that heretic? Indeed, no; his punishment is trivial
compared with theirs. They broke him on the wheel and smashed him
to rags and pulp after we left, and he is dead now, and free of your
precious race; but these poor slaves here--why, they have been dying for
years, and some of them will not escape from life for years to come. It
is the Moral Sense which teaches the factory proprietors the difference
between right and wrong--you perceive the result. They think themselves
better than dogs. Ah, you are such an illogical, unreasoning race! And
paltry--oh, unspeakably!”

Then he dropped all seriousness and just overstrained himself making fun
of us, and deriding our pride in our warlike deeds, our great heroes,
our imperishable fames, our mighty kings, our ancient aristocracies, our
venerable history--and laughed and laughed till it was enough to make a
person sick to hear him; and finally he sobered a little and said, “But,
after all, it is not all ridiculous; there is a sort of pathos about it
when one remembers how few are your days, how childish your pomps, and
what shadows you are!”

Presently all things vanished suddenly from my sight, and I knew what
it meant. The next moment we were walking along in our village; and down
toward the river I saw the twinkling lights of the Golden Stag. Then in
the dark I heard a joyful cry:

“He's come again!”

It was Seppi Wohlmeyer. He had felt his blood leap and his spirits rise
in a way that could mean only one thing, and he knew Satan was near,
although it was too dark to see him. He came to us, and we walked along
together, and Seppi poured out his gladness like water. It was as if he
were a lover and had found his sweetheart who had been lost. Seppi was
a smart and animated boy, and had enthusiasm and expression, and was
a contrast to Nikolaus and me. He was full of the last new mystery,
now--the disappearance of Hans Oppert, the village loafer. People
were beginning to be curious about it, he said. He did not say
anxious--curious was the right word, and strong enough. No one had seen
Hans for a couple of days.

“Not since he did that brutal thing, you know,” he said.

“What brutal thing?” It was Satan that asked.

“Well, he is always clubbing his dog, which is a good dog, and his only
friend, and is faithful, and loves him, and does no one any harm;
and two days ago he was at it again, just for nothing--just for
pleasure--and the dog was howling and begging, and Theodor and I begged,
too, but he threatened us, and struck the dog again with all his might
and knocked one of his eyes out, and he said to us, 'There, I hope
you are satisfied now; that's what you have got for him by your damned
meddling'--and he laughed, the heartless brute.” Seppi's voice trembled
with pity and anger. I guessed what Satan would say, and he said it.

“There is that misused word again--that shabby slander. Brutes do not
act like that, but only men.”

“Well, it was inhuman, anyway.”

“No, it wasn't, Seppi; it was human--quite distinctly human. It is not
pleasant to hear you libel the higher animals by attributing to them
dispositions which they are free from, and which are found nowhere
but in the human heart. None of the higher animals is tainted with the
disease called the Moral Sense. Purify your language, Seppi; drop those
lying phrases out of it.”

He spoke pretty sternly--for him--and I was sorry I hadn't warned Seppi
to be more particular about the word he used. I knew how he was feeling.
He would not want to offend Satan; he would rather offend all his kin.
There was an uncomfortable silence, but relief soon came, for that poor
dog came along now, with his eye hanging down, and went straight to
Satan, and began to moan and mutter brokenly, and Satan began to answer
in the same way, and it was plain that they were talking together in the
dog language. We all sat down in the grass, in the moonlight, for the
clouds were breaking away now, and Satan took the dog's head in his lap
and put the eye back in its place, and the dog was comfortable, and he
wagged his tail and licked Satan's hand, and looked thankful and said
the same; I knew he was saying it, though I did not understand the
words. Then the two talked together a bit, and Satan said:

“He says his master was drunk.”

“Yes, he was,” said we.

“And an hour later he fell over the precipice there beyond the Cliff
Pasture.”

“We know the place; it is three miles from here.”

“And the dog has been often to the village, begging people to go there,
but he was only driven away and not listened to.”

We remembered it, but hadn't understood what he wanted.

“He only wanted help for the man who had misused him, and he thought
only of that, and has had no food nor sought any. He has watched by his
master two nights. What do you think of your race? Is heaven reserved
for it, and this dog ruled out, as your teachers tell you? Can your race
add anything to this dog's stock of morals and magnanimities?” He spoke
to the creature, who jumped up, eager and happy, and apparently ready
for orders and impatient to execute them. “Get some men; go with the
dog--he will show you that carrion; and take a priest along to arrange
about insurance, for death is near.”

With the last word he vanished, to our sorrow and disappointment. We got
the men and Father Adolf, and we saw the man die. Nobody cared but the
dog; he mourned and grieved, and licked the dead face, and could not be
comforted. We buried him where he was, and without a coffin, for he had
no money, and no friend but the dog. If we had been an hour earlier the
priest would have been in time to send that poor creature to heaven, but
now he was gone down into the awful fires, to burn forever. It seemed
such a pity that in a world where so many people have difficulty to put
in their time, one little hour could not have been spared for this
poor creature who needed it so much, and to whom it would have made the
difference between eternal joy and eternal pain. It gave an appalling
idea of the value of an hour, and I thought I could never waste one
again without remorse and terror. Seppi was depressed and grieved, and
said it must be so much better to be a dog and not run such awful risks.
We took this one home with us and kept him for our own. Seppi had a very
good thought as we were walking along, and it cheered us up and made us
feel much better. He said the dog had forgiven the man that had wronged
him so, and maybe God would accept that absolution.

There was a very dull week, now, for Satan did not come, nothing much
was going on, and we boys could not venture to go and see Marget,
because the nights were moonlit and our parents might find us out if we
tried. But we came across Ursula a couple of times taking a walk in the
meadows beyond the river to air the cat, and we learned from her
that things were going well. She had natty new clothes on and bore a
prosperous look. The four groschen a day were arriving without a break,
but were not being spent for food and wine and such things--the cat
attended to all that.

Marget was enduring her forsakenness and isolation fairly well, all
things considered, and was cheerful, by help of Wilhelm Meidling. She
spent an hour or two every night in the jail with her uncle, and had
fattened him up with the cat's contributions. But she was curious to
know more about Philip Traum, and hoped I would bring him again. Ursula
was curious about him herself, and asked a good many questions about his
uncle. It made the boys laugh, for I had told them the nonsense Satan
had been stuffing her with. She got no satisfaction out of us, our
tongues being tied.

Ursula gave us a small item of information: money being plenty now,
she had taken on a servant to help about the house and run errands. She
tried to tell it in a commonplace, matter-of-course way, but she was so
set up by it and so vain of it that her pride in it leaked out pretty
plainly. It was beautiful to see her veiled delight in this grandeur,
poor old thing, but when we heard the name of the servant we wondered
if she had been altogether wise; for although we were young, and often
thoughtless, we had fairly good perception on some matters. This boy was
Gottfried Narr, a dull, good creature, with no harm in him and nothing
against him personally; still, he was under a cloud, and properly so,
for it had not been six months since a social blight had mildewed the
family--his grandmother had been burned as a witch. When that kind of
a malady is in the blood it does not always come out with just one
burning. Just now was not a good time for Ursula and Marget to be having
dealings with a member of such a family, for the witch-terror had risen
higher during the past year than it had ever reached in the memory of
the oldest villagers. The mere mention of a witch was almost enough to
frighten us out of our wits. This was natural enough, because of late
years there were more kinds of witches than there used to be; in old
times it had been only old women, but of late years they were of all
ages--even children of eight and nine; it was getting so that anybody
might turn out to be a familiar of the Devil--age and sex hadn't
anything to do with it. In our little region we had tried to extirpate
the witches, but the more of them we burned the more of the breed rose
up in their places.

Once, in a school for girls only ten miles away, the teachers found that
the back of one of the girls was all red and inflamed, and they were
greatly frightened, believing it to be the Devil's marks. The girl was
scared, and begged them not to denounce her, and said it was only fleas;
but of course it would not do to let the matter rest there. All the
girls were examined, and eleven out of the fifty were badly marked, the
rest less so. A commission was appointed, but the eleven only cried for
their mothers and would not confess. Then they were shut up, each by
herself, in the dark, and put on black bread and water for ten days and
nights; and by that time they were haggard and wild, and their eyes were
dry and they did not cry any more, but only sat and mumbled, and would
not take the food. Then one of them confessed, and said they had often
ridden through the air on broomsticks to the witches' Sabbath, and in a
bleak place high up in the mountains had danced and drunk and caroused
with several hundred other witches and the Evil One, and all had
conducted themselves in a scandalous way and had reviled the priests and
blasphemed God. That is what she said--not in narrative form, for she
was not able to remember any of the details without having them called
to her mind one after the other; but the commission did that, for they
knew just what questions to ask, they being all written down for the use
of witch-commissioners two centuries before. They asked, “Did you do so
and so?” and she always said yes, and looked weary and tired, and
took no interest in it. And so when the other ten heard that this one
confessed, they confessed, too, and answered yes to the questions. Then
they were burned at the stake all together, which was just and right;
and everybody went from all the countryside to see it. I went, too; but
when I saw that one of them was a bonny, sweet girl I used to play with,
and looked so pitiful there chained to the stake, and her mother crying
over her and devouring her with kisses and clinging around her neck, and
saying, “Oh, my God! Oh, my God!” it was too dreadful, and I went away.

It was bitter cold weather when Gottfried's grandmother was burned. It
was charged that she had cured bad headaches by kneading the person's
head and neck with her fingers--as she said--but really by the Devil's
help, as everybody knew. They were going to examine her, but she stopped
them, and confessed straight off that her power was from the Devil. So
they appointed to burn her next morning, early, in our market-square.
The officer who was to prepare the fire was there first, and prepared
it. She was there next--brought by the constables, who left her and went
to fetch another witch. Her family did not come with her. They might be
reviled, maybe stoned, if the people were excited. I came, and gave her
an apple. She was squatting at the fire, warming herself and waiting;
and her old lips and hands were blue with the cold. A stranger came
next. He was a traveler, passing through; and he spoke to her gently,
and, seeing nobody but me there to hear, said he was sorry for her.
And he asked if what she confessed was true, and she said no. He looked
surprised and still more sorry then, and asked her:

“Then why did you confess?”

“I am old and very poor,” she said, “and I work for my living. There
was no way but to confess. If I hadn't they might have set me free.
That would ruin me, for no one would forget that I had been suspected of
being a witch, and so I would get no more work, and wherever I went they
would set the dogs on me. In a little while I would starve. The fire is
best; it is soon over. You have been good to me, you two, and I thank
you.”

She snuggled closer to the fire, and put out her hands to warm them, the
snow-flakes descending soft and still on her old gray head and making
it white and whiter. The crowd was gathering now, and an egg came flying
and struck her in the eye, and broke and ran down her face. There was a
laugh at that.

I told Satan all about the eleven girls and the old woman, once, but
it did not affect him. He only said it was the human race, and what the
human race did was of no consequence. And he said he had seen it made;
and it was not made of clay; it was made of mud--part of it was, anyway.
I knew what he meant by that--the Moral Sense. He saw the thought in my
head, and it tickled him and made him laugh. Then he called a bullock
out of a pasture and petted it and talked with it, and said:

“There--he wouldn't drive children mad with hunger and fright and
loneliness, and then burn them for confessing to things invented for
them which had never happened. And neither would he break the hearts of
innocent, poor old women and make them afraid to trust themselves among
their own race; and he would not insult them in their death-agony. For
he is not besmirched with the Moral Sense, but is as the angels are, and
knows no wrong, and never does it.”

Lovely as he was, Satan could be cruelly offensive when he chose; and he
always chose when the human race was brought to his attention. He always
turned up his nose at it, and never had a kind word for it.

Well, as I was saying, we boys doubted if it was a good time for Ursula
to be hiring a member of the Narr family. We were right. When the people
found it out they were naturally indignant. And, moreover, since Marget
and Ursula hadn't enough to eat themselves, where was the money coming
from to feed another mouth? That is what they wanted to know; and in
order to find out they stopped avoiding Gottfried and began to seek his
society and have sociable conversations with him. He was pleased--not
thinking any harm and not seeing the trap--and so he talked innocently
along, and was no discreeter than a cow.

“Money!” he said; “they've got plenty of it. They pay me two groschen a
week, besides my keep. And they live on the fat of the land, I can tell
you; the prince himself can't beat their table.”

This astonishing statement was conveyed by the astrologer to Father
Adolf on a Sunday morning when he was returning from mass. He was deeply
moved, and said:

“This must be looked into.”

He said there must be witchcraft at the bottom of it, and told the
villagers to resume relations with Marget and Ursula in a private and
unostentatious way, and keep both eyes open. They were told to keep
their own counsel, and not rouse the suspicions of the household. The
villagers were at first a bit reluctant to enter such a dreadful place,
but the priest said they would be under his protection while there, and
no harm could come to them, particularly if they carried a trifle of
holy water along and kept their beads and crosses handy. This satisfied
them and made them willing to go; envy and malice made the baser sort
even eager to go.

And so poor Marget began to have company again, and was as pleased as
a cat. She was like 'most anybody else--just human, and happy in her
prosperities and not averse from showing them off a little; and she was
humanly grateful to have the warm shoulder turned to her and be smiled
upon by her friends and the village again; for of all the hard things to
bear, to be cut by your neighbors and left in contemptuous solitude is
maybe the hardest.

The bars were down, and we could all go there now, and we did--our
parents and all--day after day. The cat began to strain herself.
She provided the top of everything for those companies, and in
abundance--among them many a dish and many a wine which they had not
tasted before and which they had not even heard of except at second-hand
from the prince's servants. And the tableware was much above ordinary,
too.

Marget was troubled at times, and pursued Ursula with questions to an
uncomfortable degree; but Ursula stood her ground and stuck to it that
it was Providence, and said no word about the cat. Marget knew that
nothing was impossible to Providence, but she could not help having
doubts that this effort was from there, though she was afraid to say so,
lest disaster come of it. Witchcraft occurred to her, but she put the
thought aside, for this was before Gottfried joined the household, and
she knew Ursula was pious and a bitter hater of witches. By the time
Gottfried arrived Providence was established, unshakably intrenched,
and getting all the gratitude. The cat made no murmur, but went on
composedly improving in style and prodigality by experience.

In any community, big or little, there is always a fair proportion
of people who are not malicious or unkind by nature, and who never do
unkind things except when they are overmastered by fear, or when
their self-interest is greatly in danger, or some such matter as that.
Eseldorf had its proportion of such people, and ordinarily their good
and gentle influence was felt, but these were not ordinary times--on
account of the witch-dread--and so we did not seem to have any gentle
and compassionate hearts left, to speak of. Every person was frightened
at the unaccountable state of things at Marget's house, not doubting
that witchcraft was at the bottom of it, and fright frenzied their
reason. Naturally there were some who pitied Marget and Ursula for the
danger that was gathering about them, but naturally they did not say so;
it would not have been safe. So the others had it all their own way,
and there was none to advise the ignorant girl and the foolish woman and
warn them to modify their doings. We boys wanted to warn them, but we
backed down when it came to the pinch, being afraid. We found that we
were not manly enough nor brave enough to do a generous action when
there was a chance that it could get us into trouble. Neither of us
confessed this poor spirit to the others, but did as other people would
have done--dropped the subject and talked about something else. And I
knew we all felt mean, eating and drinking Marget's fine things along
with those companies of spies, and petting her and complimenting her
with the rest, and seeing with self-reproach how foolishly happy she
was, and never saying a word to put her on her guard. And, indeed, she
was happy, and as proud as a princess, and so grateful to have friends
again. And all the time these people were watching with all their eyes
and reporting all they saw to Father Adolf.

But he couldn't make head or tail of the situation. There must be an
enchanter somewhere on the premises, but who was it? Marget was not seen
to do any jugglery, nor was Ursula, nor yet Gottfried; and still the
wines and dainties never ran short, and a guest could not call for a
thing and not get it. To produce these effects was usual enough with
witches and enchanters--that part of it was not new; but to do it
without any incantations, or even any rumblings or earthquakes or
lightnings or apparitions--that was new, novel, wholly irregular. There
was nothing in the books like this. Enchanted things were always unreal.
Gold turned to dirt in an unenchanted atmosphere, food withered away and
vanished. But this test failed in the present case. The spies brought
samples: Father Adolf prayed over them, exorcised them, but it did no
good; they remained sound and real, they yielded to natural decay only,
and took the usual time to do it.

Father Adolf was not merely puzzled, he was also exasperated; for
these evidences very nearly convinced him--privately--that there was no
witchcraft in the matter. It did not wholly convince him, for this could
be a new kind of witchcraft. There was a way to find out as to this:
if this prodigal abundance of provender was not brought in from the
outside, but produced on the premises, there was witchcraft, sure.


Chapter 7

Marget announced a party, and invited forty people; the date for it was
seven days away. This was a fine opportunity. Marget's house stood by
itself, and it could be easily watched. All the week it was watched
night and day. Marget's household went out and in as usual, but they
carried nothing in their hands, and neither they nor others brought
anything to the house. This was ascertained. Evidently rations for forty
people were not being fetched. If they were furnished any sustenance it
would have to be made on the premises. It was true that Marget went out
with a basket every evening, but the spies ascertained that she always
brought it back empty.

The guests arrived at noon and filled the place. Father Adolf followed;
also, after a little, the astrologer, without invitation. The spies had
informed him that neither at the back nor the front had any parcels
been brought in. He entered, and found the eating and drinking going
on finely, and everything progressing in a lively and festive way. He
glanced around and perceived that many of the cooked delicacies and all
of the native and foreign fruits were of a perishable character, and he
also recognized that these were fresh and perfect. No apparitions, no
incantations, no thunder. That settled it. This was witchcraft. And not
only that, but of a new kind--a kind never dreamed of before. It was
a prodigious power, an illustrious power; he resolved to discover its
secret. The announcement of it would resound throughout the world,
penetrate to the remotest lands, paralyze all the nations with
amazement--and carry his name with it, and make him renowned forever. It
was a wonderful piece of luck, a splendid piece of luck; the glory of it
made him dizzy.

All the house made room for him; Marget politely seated him; Ursula
ordered Gottfried to bring a special table for him. Then she decked it
and furnished it, and asked for his orders.

“Bring me what you will,” he said.

The two servants brought supplies from the pantry, together with white
wine and red--a bottle of each. The astrologer, who very likely had
never seen such delicacies before, poured out a beaker of red wine,
drank it off, poured another, then began to eat with a grand appetite.

I was not expecting Satan, for it was more than a week since I had
seen or heard of him, but now he came in--I knew it by the feel, though
people were in the way and I could not see him. I heard him apologizing
for intruding; and he was going away, but Marget urged him to stay, and
he thanked her and stayed. She brought him along, introducing him to the
girls, and to Meidling, and to some of the elders; and there was quite
a rustle of whispers: “It's the young stranger we hear so much about
and can't get sight of, he is away so much.” “Dear, dear, but he is
beautiful--what is his name?” “Philip Traum.” “Ah, it fits him!” (You
see, “Traum” is German for “Dream.”) “What does he do?” “Studying for
the ministry, they say.” “His face is his fortune--he'll be a cardinal
some day.” “Where is his home?” “Away down somewhere in the tropics,
they say--has a rich uncle down there.” And so on. He made his way at
once; everybody was anxious to know him and talk with him. Everybody
noticed how cool and fresh it was, all of a sudden, and wondered at it,
for they could see that the sun was beating down the same as before,
outside, and the sky was clear of clouds, but no one guessed the reason,
of course.

The astrologer had drunk his second beaker; he poured out a third. He
set the bottle down, and by accident overturned it. He seized it before
much was spilled, and held it up to the light, saying, “What a pity--it
is royal wine.” Then his face lighted with joy or triumph, or something,
and he said, “Quick! Bring a bowl.”

It was brought--a four-quart one. He took up that two-pint bottle and
began to pour; went on pouring, the red liquor gurgling and gushing
into the white bowl and rising higher and higher up its sides, everybody
staring and holding their breath--and presently the bowl was full to the
brim.

“Look at the bottle,” he said, holding it up; “it is full yet!” I
glanced at Satan, and in that moment he vanished. Then Father Adolf rose
up, flushed and excited, crossed himself, and began to thunder in his
great voice, “This house is bewitched and accursed!” People began to cry
and shriek and crowd toward the door. “I summon this detected household
to--”

His words were cut off short. His face became red, then purple, but he
could not utter another sound. Then I saw Satan, a transparent film,
melt into the astrologer's body; then the astrologer put up his hand,
and apparently in his own voice said, “Wait--remain where you are.” All
stopped where they stood. “Bring a funnel!” Ursula brought it, trembling
and scared, and he stuck it in the bottle and took up the great bowl
and began to pour the wine back, the people gazing and dazed with
astonishment, for they knew the bottle was already full before he began.
He emptied the whole of the bowl into the bottle, then smiled out over
the room, chuckled, and said, indifferently: “It is nothing--anybody can
do it! With my powers I can even do much more.”

A frightened cry burst out everywhere. “Oh, my God, he is possessed!”
 and there was a tumultuous rush for the door which swiftly emptied the
house of all who did not belong in it except us boys and Meidling.
We boys knew the secret, and would have told it if we could, but we
couldn't. We were very thankful to Satan for furnishing that good help
at the needful time.

Marget was pale, and crying; Meidling looked kind of petrified; Ursula
the same; but Gottfried was the worst--he couldn't stand, he was so weak
and scared. For he was of a witch family, you know, and it would be
bad for him to be suspected. Agnes came loafing in, looking pious and
unaware, and wanted to rub up against Ursula and be petted, but Ursula
was afraid of her and shrank away from her, but pretending she was not
meaning any incivility, for she knew very well it wouldn't answer to
have strained relations with that kind of a cat. But we boys took Agnes
and petted her, for Satan would not have befriended her if he had not
had a good opinion of her, and that was indorsement enough for us. He
seemed to trust anything that hadn't the Moral Sense.

Outside, the guests, panic-stricken, scattered in every direction and
fled in a pitiable state of terror; and such a tumult as they made with
their running and sobbing and shrieking and shouting that soon all the
village came flocking from their houses to see what had happened, and
they thronged the street and shouldered and jostled one another in
excitement and fright; and then Father Adolf appeared, and they fell
apart in two walls like the cloven Red Sea, and presently down this lane
the astrologer came striding and mumbling, and where he passed the lanes
surged back in packed masses, and fell silent with awe, and their eyes
stared and their breasts heaved, and several women fainted; and when he
was gone by the crowd swarmed together and followed him at a distance,
talking excitedly and asking questions and finding out the
facts. Finding out the facts and passing them on to others, with
improvements--improvements which soon enlarged the bowl of wine to a
barrel, and made the one bottle hold it all and yet remain empty to the
last.

When the astrologer reached the market-square he went straight to a
juggler, fantastically dressed, who was keeping three brass balls in the
air, and took them from him and faced around upon the approaching crowd
and said: “This poor clown is ignorant of his art. Come forward and see
an expert perform.”

So saying, he tossed the balls up one after another and set them
whirling in a slender bright oval in the air, and added another, then
another and another, and soon--no one seeing whence he got them--adding,
adding, adding, the oval lengthening all the time, his hands moving so
swiftly that they were just a web or a blur and not distinguishable as
hands; and such as counted said there were now a hundred balls in the
air. The spinning great oval reached up twenty feet in the air and was
a shining and glinting and wonderful sight. Then he folded his arms
and told the balls to go on spinning without his help--and they did it.
After a couple of minutes he said, “There, that will do,” and the oval
broke and came crashing down, and the balls scattered abroad and rolled
every whither. And wherever one of them came the people fell back in
dread, and no one would touch it. It made him laugh, and he scoffed at
the people and called them cowards and old women. Then he turned and saw
the tight-rope, and said foolish people were daily wasting their money
to see a clumsy and ignorant varlet degrade that beautiful art; now they
should see the work of a master. With that he made a spring into the air
and lit firm on his feet on the rope. Then he hopped the whole length of
it back and forth on one foot, with his hands clasped over his eyes; and
next he began to throw somersaults, both backward and forward, and threw
twenty-seven.

The people murmured, for the astrologer was old, and always before
had been halting of movement and at times even lame, but he was nimble
enough now and went on with his antics in the liveliest manner. Finally
he sprang lightly down and walked away, and passed up the road and
around the corner and disappeared. Then that great, pale, silent, solid
crowd drew a deep breath and looked into one another's faces as if
they said: “Was it real? Did you see it, or was it only I--and was I
dreaming?” Then they broke into a low murmur of talking, and fell apart
in couples, and moved toward their homes, still talking in that awed
way, with faces close together and laying a hand on an arm and making
other such gestures as people make when they have been deeply impressed
by something.

We boys followed behind our fathers, and listened, catching all we could
of what they said; and when they sat down in our house and continued
their talk they still had us for company. They were in a sad mood, for
it was certain, they said, that disaster for the village must follow
this awful visitation of witches and devils. Then my father
remembered that father Adolf had been struck dumb at the moment of his
denunciation.

“They have not ventured to lay their hands upon an anointed servant
of God before,” he said; “and how they could have dared it this time I
cannot make out, for he wore his crucifix. Isn't it so?”

“Yes,” said the others, “we saw it.”

“It is serious, friends, it is very serious. Always before, we had a
protection. It has failed.”

The others shook, as with a sort of chill, and muttered those words
over--“It has failed.” “God has forsaken us.”

“It is true,” said Seppi Wohlmeyer's father; “there is nowhere to look
for help.”

“The people will realize this,” said Nikolaus's father, the judge, “and
despair will take away their courage and their energies. We have indeed
fallen upon evil times.”

He sighed, and Wohlmeyer said, in a troubled voice: “The report of it
all will go about the country, and our village will be shunned as being
under the displeasure of God. The Golden Stag will know hard times.”

“True, neighbor,” said my father; “all of us will suffer--all in repute,
many in estate. And, good God!--”

“What is it?”

“That can come--to finish us!”

“Name it--um Gottes Willen!”

“The Interdict!”

It smote like a thunderclap, and they were like to swoon with the terror
of it. Then the dread of this calamity roused their energies, and they
stopped brooding and began to consider ways to avert it. They discussed
this, that, and the other way, and talked till the afternoon was far
spent, then confessed that at present they could arrive at no decision.
So they parted sorrowfully, with oppressed hearts which were filled with
bodings.

While they were saying their parting words I slipped out and set my
course for Marget's house to see what was happening there. I met many
people, but none of them greeted me. It ought to have been surprising,
but it was not, for they were so distraught with fear and dread that
they were not in their right minds, I think; they were white and
haggard, and walked like persons in a dream, their eyes open but seeing
nothing, their lips moving but uttering nothing, and worriedly clasping
and unclasping their hands without knowing it.

At Marget's it was like a funeral. She and Wilhelm sat together on the
sofa, but said nothing, and not even holding hands. Both were steeped
in gloom, and Marget's eyes were red from the crying she had been doing.
She said:

“I have been begging him to go, and come no more, and so save himself
alive. I cannot bear to be his murderer. This house is bewitched, and
no inmate will escape the fire. But he will not go, and he will be lost
with the rest.”

Wilhelm said he would not go; if there was danger for her, his place was
by her, and there he would remain. Then she began to cry again, and it
was all so mournful that I wished I had stayed away. There was a knock,
now, and Satan came in, fresh and cheery and beautiful, and brought that
winy atmosphere of his and changed the whole thing. He never said a
word about what had been happening, nor about the awful fears which were
freezing the blood in the hearts of the community, but began to talk and
rattle on about all manner of gay and pleasant things; and next about
music--an artful stroke which cleared away the remnant of Marget's
depression and brought her spirits and her interests broad awake. She
had not heard any one talk so well and so knowingly on that subject
before, and she was so uplifted by it and so charmed that what she was
feeling lit up her face and came out in her words; and Wilhelm noticed
it and did not look as pleased as he ought to have done. And next Satan
branched off into poetry, and recited some, and did it well, and Marget
was charmed again; and again Wilhelm was not as pleased as he ought to
have been, and this time Marget noticed it and was remorseful.

I fell asleep to pleasant music that night--the patter of rain upon the
panes and the dull growling of distant thunder. Away in the night Satan
came and roused me and said: “Come with me. Where shall we go?”

“Anywhere--so it is with you.”

Then there was a fierce glare of sunlight, and he said, “This is China.”

That was a grand surprise, and made me sort of drunk with vanity and
gladness to think I had come so far--so much, much farther than anybody
else in our village, including Bartel Sperling, who had such a great
opinion of his travels. We buzzed around over that empire for more than
half an hour, and saw the whole of it. It was wonderful, the spectacles
we saw; and some were beautiful, others too horrible to think. For
instance--However, I may go into that by and by, and also why Satan
chose China for this excursion instead of another place; it would
interrupt my tale to do it now. Finally we stopped flitting and lit.

We sat upon a mountain commanding a vast landscape of mountain-range
and gorge and valley and plain and river, with cities and villages
slumbering in the sunlight, and a glimpse of blue sea on the farther
verge. It was a tranquil and dreamy picture, beautiful to the eye and
restful to the spirit. If we could only make a change like that whenever
we wanted to, the world would be easier to live in than it is, for
change of scene shifts the mind's burdens to the other shoulder and
banishes old, shop-worn wearinesses from mind and body both.

We talked together, and I had the idea of trying to reform Satan and
persuade him to lead a better life. I told him about all those things
he had been doing, and begged him to be more considerate and stop making
people unhappy. I said I knew he did not mean any harm, but that he
ought to stop and consider the possible consequences of a thing before
launching it in that impulsive and random way of his; then he would
not make so much trouble. He was not hurt by this plain speech; he only
looked amused and surprised, and said:

“What? I do random things? Indeed, I never do. I stop and consider
possible consequences? Where is the need? I know what the consequences
are going to be--always.”

“Oh, Satan, then how could you do these things?”

“Well, I will tell you, and you must understand if you can. You
belong to a singular race. Every man is a suffering-machine and
a happiness-machine combined. The two functions work together
harmoniously, with a fine and delicate precision, on the give-and-take
principle. For every happiness turned out in the one department the
other stands ready to modify it with a sorrow or a pain--maybe a dozen.
In most cases the man's life is about equally divided between
happiness and unhappiness. When this is not the case the unhappiness
predominates--always; never the other. Sometimes a man's make and
disposition are such that his misery-machine is able to do nearly all
the business. Such a man goes through life almost ignorant of what
happiness is. Everything he touches, everything he does, brings a
misfortune upon him. You have seen such people? To that kind of a person
life is not an advantage, is it? It is only a disaster. Sometimes for an
hour's happiness a man's machinery makes him pay years of misery. Don't
you know that? It happens every now and then. I will give you a case
or two presently. Now the people of your village are nothing to me--you
know that, don't you?”

I did not like to speak out too flatly, so I said I had suspected it.

“Well, it is true that they are nothing to me. It is not possible
that they should be. The difference between them and me is abysmal,
immeasurable. They have no intellect.”

“No intellect?”

“Nothing that resembles it. At a future time I will examine what man
calls his mind and give you the details of that chaos, then you will see
and understand. Men have nothing in common with me--there is no point of
contact; they have foolish little feelings and foolish little vanities
and impertinences and ambitions; their foolish little life is but a
laugh, a sigh, and extinction; and they have no sense. Only the Moral
Sense. I will show you what I mean. Here is a red spider, not so big
as a pin's head. Can you imagine an elephant being interested in
him--caring whether he is happy or isn't, or whether he is wealthy or
poor, or whether his sweetheart returns his love or not, or whether his
mother is sick or well, or whether he is looked up to in society or
not, or whether his enemies will smite him or his friends desert him, or
whether his hopes will suffer blight or his political ambitions fail,
or whether he shall die in the bosom of his family or neglected and
despised in a foreign land? These things can never be important to the
elephant; they are nothing to him; he cannot shrink his sympathies to
the microscopic size of them. Man is to me as the red spider is to the
elephant. The elephant has nothing against the spider--he cannot get
down to that remote level; I have nothing against man. The elephant is
indifferent; I am indifferent. The elephant would not take the trouble
to do the spider an ill turn; if he took the notion he might do him a
good turn, if it came in his way and cost nothing. I have done men good
service, but no ill turns.

“The elephant lives a century, the red spider a day; in power,
intellect, and dignity the one creature is separated from the other by
a distance which is simply astronomical. Yet in these, as in all
qualities, man is immeasurably further below me than is the wee spider
below the elephant.

“Man's mind clumsily and tediously and laboriously patches little
trivialities together and gets a result--such as it is. My mind creates!
Do you get the force of that? Creates anything it desires--and in
a moment. Creates without material. Creates fluids, solids,
colors--anything, everything--out of the airy nothing which is called
Thought. A man imagines a silk thread, imagines a machine to make it,
imagines a picture, then by weeks of labor embroiders it on canvas
with the thread. I think the whole thing, and in a moment it is before
you--created.

“I think a poem, music, the record of a game of chess--anything--and
it is there. This is the immortal mind--nothing is beyond its reach.
Nothing can obstruct my vision; the rocks are transparent to me, and
darkness is daylight. I do not need to open a book; I take the whole of
its contents into my mind at a single glance, through the cover; and in
a million years I could not forget a single word of it, or its place in
the volume. Nothing goes on in the skull of man, bird, fish, insect, or
other creature which can be hidden from me. I pierce the learned man's
brain with a single glance, and the treasures which cost him threescore
years to accumulate are mine; he can forget, and he does forget, but I
retain.

“Now, then, I perceive by your thoughts that you are understanding me
fairly well. Let us proceed. Circumstances might so fall out that the
elephant could like the spider--supposing he can see it--but he could
not love it. His love is for his own kind--for his equals. An
angel's love is sublime, adorable, divine, beyond the imagination of
man--infinitely beyond it! But it is limited to his own august order. If
it fell upon one of your race for only an instant, it would consume
its object to ashes. No, we cannot love men, but we can be harmlessly
indifferent to them; we can also like them, sometimes. I like you and
the boys, I like father Peter, and for your sakes I am doing all these
things for the villagers.”

He saw that I was thinking a sarcasm, and he explained his position.

“I have wrought well for the villagers, though it does not look like
it on the surface. Your race never know good fortune from ill. They are
always mistaking the one for the other. It is because they cannot see
into the future. What I am doing for the villagers will bear good fruit
some day; in some cases to themselves; in others, to unborn generations
of men. No one will ever know that I was the cause, but it will be none
the less true, for all that. Among you boys you have a game: you stand a
row of bricks on end a few inches apart; you push a brick, it knocks its
neighbor over, the neighbor knocks over the next brick--and so on till
all the row is prostrate. That is human life. A child's first act knocks
over the initial brick, and the rest will follow inexorably. If you
could see into the future, as I can, you would see everything that was
going to happen to that creature; for nothing can change the order of
its life after the first event has determined it. That is, nothing will
change it, because each act unfailingly begets an act, that act begets
another, and so on to the end, and the seer can look forward down the
line and see just when each act is to have birth, from cradle to grave.”

“Does God order the career?”

“Foreordain it? No. The man's circumstances and environment order it.
His first act determines the second and all that follow after. But
suppose, for argument's sake, that the man should skip one of these
acts; an apparently trifling one, for instance; suppose that it had been
appointed that on a certain day, at a certain hour and minute and second
and fraction of a second he should go to the well, and he didn't go.
That man's career would change utterly, from that moment; thence to the
grave it would be wholly different from the career which his first act
as a child had arranged for him. Indeed, it might be that if he had
gone to the well he would have ended his career on a throne, and that
omitting to do it would set him upon a career that would lead to
beggary and a pauper's grave. For instance: if at any time--say in
boyhood--Columbus had skipped the triflingest little link in the chain
of acts projected and made inevitable by his first childish act, it
would have changed his whole subsequent life, and he would have become
a priest and died obscure in an Italian village, and America would not
have been discovered for two centuries afterward. I know this. To
skip any one of the billion acts in Columbus's chain would have wholly
changed his life. I have examined his billion of possible careers, and
in only one of them occurs the discovery of America. You people do not
suspect that all of your acts are of one size and importance, but it is
true; to snatch at an appointed fly is as big with fate for you as is
any other appointed act--”

“As the conquering of a continent, for instance?”

“Yes. Now, then, no man ever does drop a link--the thing has never
happened! Even when he is trying to make up his mind as to whether
he will do a thing or not, that itself is a link, an act, and has its
proper place in his chain; and when he finally decides an act, that also
was the thing which he was absolutely certain to do. You see, now, that
a man will never drop a link in his chain. He cannot. If he made up his
mind to try, that project would itself be an unavoidable link--a thought
bound to occur to him at that precise moment, and made certain by the
first act of his babyhood.”

It seemed so dismal!

“He is a prisoner for life,” I said sorrowfully, “and cannot get free.”

“No, of himself he cannot get away from the consequences of his first
childish act. But I can free him.”

I looked up wistfully.

“I have changed the careers of a number of your villagers.”

I tried to thank him, but found it difficult, and let it drop.

“I shall make some other changes. You know that little Lisa Brandt?”

“Oh yes, everybody does. My mother says she is so sweet and so lovely
that she is not like any other child. She says she will be the pride of
the village when she grows up; and its idol, too, just as she is now.”

“I shall change her future.”

“Make it better?” I asked.

“Yes. And I will change the future of Nikolaus.”

I was glad, this time, and said, “I don't need to ask about his case;
you will be sure to do generously by him.”

“It is my intention.”

Straight off I was building that great future of Nicky's in my
imagination, and had already made a renowned general of him and
hofmeister at the court, when I noticed that Satan was waiting for me
to get ready to listen again. I was ashamed of having exposed my cheap
imaginings to him, and was expecting some sarcasms, but it did not
happen. He proceeded with his subject:

“Nicky's appointed life is sixty-two years.”

“That's grand!” I said.

“Lisa's, thirty-six. But, as I told you, I shall change their lives and
those ages. Two minutes and a quarter from now Nikolaus will wake out of
his sleep and find the rain blowing in. It was appointed that he should
turn over and go to sleep again. But I have appointed that he shall
get up and close the window first. That trifle will change his career
entirely. He will rise in the morning two minutes later than the chain
of his life had appointed him to rise. By consequence, thenceforth
nothing will ever happen to him in accordance with the details of the
old chain.” He took out his watch and sat looking at it a few moments,
then said: “Nikolaus has risen to close the window. His life is changed,
his new career has begun. There will be consequences.”

It made me feel creepy; it was uncanny.

“But for this change certain things would happen twelve days from now.
For instance, Nikolaus would save Lisa from drowning. He would arrive
on the scene at exactly the right moment--four minutes past ten, the
long-ago appointed instant of time--and the water would be shoal, the
achievement easy and certain. But he will arrive some seconds too late,
now; Lisa will have struggled into deeper water. He will do his best,
but both will drown.”

“Oh, Satan! Oh, dear Satan!” I cried, with the tears rising in my eyes,
“save them! Don't let it happen. I can't bear to lose Nikolaus, he is my
loving playmate and friend; and think of Lisa's poor mother!”

I clung to him and begged and pleaded, but he was not moved. He made me
sit down again, and told me I must hear him out.

“I have changed Nikolaus's life, and this has changed Lisa's. If I had
not done this, Nikolaus would save Lisa, then he would catch cold from
his drenching; one of your race's fantastic and desolating scarlet
fevers would follow, with pathetic after-effects; for forty-six years
he would lie in his bed a paralytic log, deaf, dumb, blind, and praying
night and day for the blessed relief of death. Shall I change his life
back?”

“Oh no! Oh, not for the world! In charity and pity leave it as it is.”

“It is best so. I could not have changed any other link in his life and
done him so good a service. He had a billion possible careers, but not
one of them was worth living; they were charged full with miseries and
disasters. But for my intervention he would do his brave deed twelve
days from now--a deed begun and ended in six minutes--and get for all
reward those forty-six years of sorrow and suffering I told you of.
It is one of the cases I was thinking of awhile ago when I said
that sometimes an act which brings the actor an hour's happiness and
self-satisfaction is paid for--or punished--by years of suffering.”

I wondered what poor little Lisa's early death would save her from. He
answered the thought:

“From ten years of pain and slow recovery from an accident, and then
from nineteen years' pollution, shame, depravity, crime, ending with
death at the hands of the executioner. Twelve days hence she will die;
her mother would save her life if she could. Am I not kinder than her
mother?”

“Yes--oh, indeed yes; and wiser.”

“Father Peter's case is coming on presently. He will be acquitted,
through unassailable proofs of his innocence.”

“Why, Satan, how can that be? Do you really think it?”

“Indeed, I know it. His good name will be restored, and the rest of his
life will be happy.”

“I can believe it. To restore his good name will have that effect.”

“His happiness will not proceed from that cause. I shall change his
life that day, for his good. He will never know his good name has been
restored.”

In my mind--and modestly--I asked for particulars, but Satan paid no
attention to my thought. Next, my mind wandered to the astrologer, and I
wondered where he might be.

“In the moon,” said Satan, with a fleeting sound which I believed was
a chuckle. “I've got him on the cold side of it, too. He doesn't know
where he is, and is not having a pleasant time; still, it is good enough
for him, a good place for his star studies. I shall need him presently;
then I shall bring him back and possess him again. He has a long and
cruel and odious life before him, but I will change that, for I have no
feeling against him and am quite willing to do him a kindness. I think I
shall get him burned.”

He had such strange notions of kindness! But angels are made so, and
do not know any better. Their ways are not like our ways; and, besides,
human beings are nothing to them; they think they are only freaks. It
seems to me odd that he should put the astrologer so far away; he could
have dumped him in Germany just as well, where he would be handy.

“Far away?” said Satan. “To me no place is far away; distance does not
exist for me. The sun is less than a hundred million miles from here,
and the light that is falling upon us has taken eight minutes to come;
but I can make that flight, or any other, in a fraction of time so
minute that it cannot be measured by a watch. I have but to think the
journey, and it is accomplished.”

I held out my hand and said, “The light lies upon it; think it into a
glass of wine, Satan.”

He did it. I drank the wine.

“Break the glass,” he said.

I broke it.

“There--you see it is real. The villagers thought the brass balls were
magic stuff and as perishable as smoke. They were afraid to touch them.
You are a curious lot--your race. But come along; I have business. I
will put you to bed.” Said and done. Then he was gone; but his voice
came back to me through the rain and darkness saying, “Yes, tell Seppi,
but no other.”

It was the answer to my thought.


Chapter 8

Sleep would not come. It was not because I was proud of my travels and
excited about having been around the big world to China, and feeling
contemptuous of Bartel Sperling, “the traveler,” as he called himself,
and looked down upon us others because he had been to Vienna once and
was the only Eseldorf boy who had made such a journey and seen the
world's wonders. At another time that would have kept me awake, but it
did not affect me now. No, my mind was filled with Nikolaus, my thoughts
ran upon him only, and the good days we had seen together at romps and
frolics in the woods and the fields and the river in the long summer
days, and skating and sliding in the winter when our parents thought
we were in school. And now he was going out of this young life, and the
summers and winters would come and go, and we others would rove and play
as before, but his place would be vacant; we should see him no more.
To-morrow he would not suspect, but would be as he had always been,
and it would shock me to hear him laugh, and see him do lightsome and
frivolous things, for to me he would be a corpse, with waxen hands and
dull eyes, and I should see the shroud around his face; and next day he
would not suspect, nor the next, and all the time his handful of days
would be wasting swiftly away and that awful thing coming nearer and
nearer, his fate closing steadily around him and no one knowing it but
Seppi and me. Twelve days--only twelve days. It was awful to think of. I
noticed that in my thoughts I was not calling him by his familiar
names, Nick and Nicky, but was speaking of him by his full name, and
reverently, as one speaks of the dead. Also, as incident after incident
of our comradeship came thronging into my mind out of the past, I
noticed that they were mainly cases where I had wronged him or hurt
him, and they rebuked me and reproached me, and my heart was wrung with
remorse, just as it is when we remember our unkindnesses to friends who
have passed beyond the veil, and we wish we could have them back again,
if only for a moment, so that we could go on our knees to them and say,
“Have pity, and forgive.”

Once when we were nine years old he went a long errand of nearly two
miles for the fruiterer, who gave him a splendid big apple for reward,
and he was flying home with it, almost beside himself with astonishment
and delight, and I met him, and he let me look at the apple, not
thinking of treachery, and I ran off with it, eating it as I ran, he
following me and begging; and when he overtook me I offered him the
core, which was all that was left; and I laughed. Then he turned away,
crying, and said he had meant to give it to his little sister. That
smote me, for she was slowly getting well of a sickness, and it would
have been a proud moment for him, to see her joy and surprise and have
her caresses. But I was ashamed to say I was ashamed, and only said
something rude and mean, to pretend I did not care, and he made no reply
in words, but there was a wounded look in his face as he turned away
toward his home which rose before me many times in after years, in the
night, and reproached me and made me ashamed again. It had grown dim in
my mind, by and by, then it disappeared; but it was back now, and not
dim.

Once at school, when we were eleven, I upset my ink and spoiled four
copy-books, and was in danger of severe punishment; but I put it upon
him, and he got the whipping.

And only last year I had cheated him in a trade, giving him a large
fish-hook which was partly broken through for three small sound ones.
The first fish he caught broke the hook, but he did not know I was
blamable, and he refused to take back one of the small hooks which my
conscience forced me to offer him, but said, “A trade is a trade; the
hook was bad, but that was not your fault.”

No, I could not sleep. These little, shabby wrongs upbraided me and
tortured me, and with a pain much sharper than one feels when the wrongs
have been done to the living. Nikolaus was living, but no matter; he was
to me as one already dead. The wind was still moaning about the eaves,
the rain still pattering upon the panes.

In the morning I sought out Seppi and told him. It was down by the
river. His lips moved, but he did not say anything, he only looked dazed
and stunned, and his face turned very white. He stood like that a few
moments, the tears welling into his eyes, then he turned away and I
locked my arm in his and we walked along thinking, but not speaking.
We crossed the bridge and wandered through the meadows and up among the
hills and the woods, and at last the talk came and flowed freely, and it
was all about Nikolaus and was a recalling of the life we had lived with
him. And every now and then Seppi said, as if to himself:

“Twelve days!--less than twelve days.”

We said we must be with him all the time; we must have all of him we
could; the days were precious now. Yet we did not go to seek him. It
would be like meeting the dead, and we were afraid. We did not say it,
but that was what we were feeling. And so it gave us a shock when we
turned a curve and came upon Nikolaus face to face. He shouted, gaily:

“Hi-hi! What is the matter? Have you seen a ghost?”

We couldn't speak, but there was no occasion; he was willing to talk
for us all, for he had just seen Satan and was in high spirits about it.
Satan had told him about our trip to China, and he had begged Satan to
take him a journey, and Satan had promised. It was to be a far journey,
and wonderful and beautiful; and Nikolaus had begged him to take us,
too, but he said no, he would take us some day, maybe, but not now.
Satan would come for him on the 13th, and Nikolaus was already counting
the hours, he was so impatient.

That was the fatal day. We were already counting the hours, too.

We wandered many a mile, always following paths which had been our
favorites from the days when we were little, and always we talked about
the old times. All the blitheness was with Nikolaus; we others could
not shake off our depression. Our tone toward Nikolaus was so strangely
gentle and tender and yearning that he noticed it, and was pleased; and
we were constantly doing him deferential little offices of courtesy,
and saying, “Wait, let me do that for you,” and that pleased him, too. I
gave him seven fish-hooks--all I had--and made him take them; and
Seppi gave him his new knife and a humming-top painted red and
yellow--atonements for swindles practised upon him formerly, as I
learned later, and probably no longer remembered by Nikolaus now. These
things touched him, and he could not have believed that we loved him so;
and his pride in it and gratefulness for it cut us to the heart, we were
so undeserving of them. When we parted at last, he was radiant, and said
he had never had such a happy day.

As we walked along homeward, Seppi said, “We always prized him, but
never so much as now, when we are going to lose him.”

Next day and every day we spent all of our spare time with Nikolaus;
and also added to it time which we (and he) stole from work and other
duties, and this cost the three of us some sharp scoldings, and some
threats of punishment. Every morning two of us woke with a start and
a shudder, saying, as the days flew along, “Only ten days left;” “only
nine days left;” “only eight;” “only seven.” Always it was narrowing.
Always Nikolaus was gay and happy, and always puzzled because we were
not. He wore his invention to the bone trying to invent ways to cheer us
up, but it was only a hollow success; he could see that our jollity had
no heart in it, and that the laughs we broke into came up against some
obstruction or other and suffered damage and decayed into a sigh. He
tried to find out what the matter was, so that he could help us out of
our trouble or make it lighter by sharing it with us; so we had to tell
many lies to deceive him and appease him.

But the most distressing thing of all was that he was always making
plans, and often they went beyond the 13th! Whenever that happened it
made us groan in spirit. All his mind was fixed upon finding some way
to conquer our depression and cheer us up; and at last, when he had but
three days to live, he fell upon the right idea and was jubilant over
it--a boys-and-girls' frolic and dance in the woods, up there where we
first met Satan, and this was to occur on the 14th. It was ghastly, for
that was his funeral day. We couldn't venture to protest; it would only
have brought a “Why?” which we could not answer. He wanted us to help
him invite his guests, and we did it--one can refuse nothing to a dying
friend. But it was dreadful, for really we were inviting them to his
funeral.

It was an awful eleven days; and yet, with a lifetime stretching back
between to-day and then, they are still a grateful memory to me, and
beautiful. In effect they were days of companionship with one's sacred
dead, and I have known no comradeship that was so close or so precious.
We clung to the hours and the minutes, counting them as they wasted
away, and parting with them with that pain and bereavement which a miser
feels who sees his hoard filched from him coin by coin by robbers and is
helpless to prevent it.

When the evening of the last day came we stayed out too long; Seppi and
I were in fault for that; we could not bear to part with Nikolaus; so
it was very late when we left him at his door. We lingered near awhile,
listening; and that happened which we were fearing. His father gave him
the promised punishment, and we heard his shrieks. But we listened only
a moment, then hurried away, remorseful for this thing which we had
caused. And sorry for the father, too; our thought being, “If he only
knew--if he only knew!”

In the morning Nikolaus did not meet us at the appointed place, so we
went to his home to see what the matter was. His mother said:

“His father is out of all patience with these goings-on, and will not
have any more of it. Half the time when Nick is needed he is not to be
found; then it turns out that he has been gadding around with you two.
His father gave him a flogging last night. It always grieved me before,
and many's the time I have begged him off and saved him, but this time
he appealed to me in vain, for I was out of patience myself.”

“I wish you had saved him just this one time,” I said, my voice
trembling a little; “it would ease a pain in your heart to remember it
some day.”

She was ironing at the time, and her back was partly toward me. She
turned about with a startled or wondering look in her face and said,
“What do you mean by that?”

I was not prepared, and didn't know anything to say; so it was awkward,
for she kept looking at me; but Seppi was alert and spoke up:

“Why, of course it would be pleasant to remember, for the very reason
we were out so late was that Nikolaus got to telling how good you are to
him, and how he never got whipped when you were by to save him; and he
was so full of it, and we were so full of the interest of it, that none
of us noticed how late it was getting.”

“Did he say that? Did he?” and she put her apron to her eyes.

“You can ask Theodor--he will tell you the same.”

“It is a dear, good lad, my Nick,” she said. “I am sorry I let him get
whipped; I will never do it again. To think--all the time I was sitting
here last night, fretting and angry at him, he was loving me and
praising me! Dear, dear, if we could only know! Then we shouldn't ever
go wrong; but we are only poor, dumb beasts groping around and making
mistakes. I shan't ever think of last night without a pang.”

She was like all the rest; it seemed as if nobody could open a mouth, in
these wretched days, without saying something that made us shiver. They
were “groping around,” and did not know what true, sorrowfully true
things they were saying by accident.

Seppi asked if Nikolaus might go out with us.

“I am sorry,” she answered, “but he can't. To punish him further, his
father doesn't allow him to go out of the house to-day.”

We had a great hope! I saw it in Seppi's eyes. We thought, “If he cannot
leave the house, he cannot be drowned.” Seppi asked, to make sure:

“Must he stay in all day, or only the morning?”

“All day. It's such a pity, too; it's a beautiful day, and he is so
unused to being shut up. But he is busy planning his party, and maybe
that is company for him. I do hope he isn't too lonesome.”

Seppi saw that in her eye which emboldened him to ask if we might go up
and help him pass his time.

“And welcome!” she said, right heartily. “Now I call that real
friendship, when you might be abroad in the fields and the woods, having
a happy time. You are good boys, I'll allow that, though you don't
always find satisfactory ways of improving it. Take these cakes--for
yourselves--and give him this one, from his mother.”

The first thing we noticed when we entered Nikolaus's room was the
time--a quarter to 10. Could that be correct? Only such a few minutes to
live! I felt a contraction at my heart. Nikolaus jumped up and gave us
a glad welcome. He was in good spirits over his plannings for his party
and had not been lonesome.

“Sit down,” he said, “and look at what I've been doing. And I've
finished a kite that you will say is a beauty. It's drying, in the
kitchen; I'll fetch it.”

He had been spending his penny savings in fanciful trifles of various
kinds, to go as prizes in the games, and they were marshaled with fine
and showy effect upon the table. He said:

“Examine them at your leisure while I get mother to touch up the kite
with her iron if it isn't dry enough yet.”

Then he tripped out and went clattering down-stairs, whistling.

We did not look at the things; we couldn't take any interest in anything
but the clock. We sat staring at it in silence, listening to
the ticking, and every time the minute-hand jumped we nodded
recognition--one minute fewer to cover in the race for life or for
death. Finally Seppi drew a deep breath and said:

“Two minutes to ten. Seven minutes more and he will pass the
death-point. Theodor, he is going to be saved! He's going to--”

“Hush! I'm on needles. Watch the clock and keep still.”

Five minutes more. We were panting with the strain and the excitement.
Another three minutes, and there was a footstep on the stair.

“Saved!” And we jumped up and faced the door.

The old mother entered, bringing the kite. “Isn't it a beauty?” she
said. “And, dear me, how he has slaved over it--ever since daylight,
I think, and only finished it awhile before you came.” She stood it
against the wall, and stepped back to take a view of it. “He drew the
pictures his own self, and I think they are very good. The church isn't
so very good, I'll have to admit, but look at the bridge--any one can
recognize the bridge in a minute. He asked me to bring it up.... Dear
me! it's seven minutes past ten, and I--”

“But where is he?”

“He? Oh, he'll be here soon; he's gone out a minute.”

“Gone out?”

“Yes. Just as he came down-stairs little Lisa's mother came in and said
the child had wandered off somewhere, and as she was a little uneasy I
told Nikolaus to never mind about his father's orders--go and look her
up.... Why, how white you two do look! I do believe you are sick. Sit
down; I'll fetch something. That cake has disagreed with you. It is a
little heavy, but I thought--”

She disappeared without finishing her sentence, and we hurried at once
to the back window and looked toward the river. There was a great crowd
at the other end of the bridge, and people were flying toward that point
from every direction.

“Oh, it is all over--poor Nikolaus! Why, oh, why did she let him get out
of the house!”

“Come away,” said Seppi, half sobbing, “come quick--we can't bear to
meet her; in five minutes she will know.”

But we were not to escape. She came upon us at the foot of the stairs,
with her cordials in her hands, and made us come in and sit down and
take the medicine. Then she watched the effect, and it did not satisfy
her; so she made us wait longer, and kept upbraiding herself for giving
us the unwholesome cake.

Presently the thing happened which we were dreading. There was a sound
of tramping and scraping outside, and a crowd came solemnly in, with
heads uncovered, and laid the two drowned bodies on the bed.

“Oh, my God!” that poor mother cried out, and fell on her knees, and put
her arms about her dead boy and began to cover the wet face with kisses.
“Oh, it was I that sent him, and I have been his death. If I had obeyed,
and kept him in the house, this would not have happened. And I am
rightly punished; I was cruel to him last night, and him begging me, his
own mother, to be his friend.”

And so she went on and on, and all the women cried, and pitied her, and
tried to comfort her, but she could not forgive herself and could not
be comforted, and kept on saying if she had not sent him out he would be
alive and well now, and she was the cause of his death.

It shows how foolish people are when they blame themselves for anything
they have done. Satan knows, and he said nothing happens that your first
act hasn't arranged to happen and made inevitable; and so, of your own
motion you can't ever alter the scheme or do a thing that will break
a link. Next we heard screams, and Frau Brandt came wildly plowing and
plunging through the crowd with her dress in disorder and hair flying
loose, and flung herself upon her dead child with moans and kisses and
pleadings and endearments; and by and by she rose up almost exhausted
with her outpourings of passionate emotion, and clenched her fist and
lifted it toward the sky, and her tear-drenched face grew hard and
resentful, and she said:

“For nearly two weeks I have had dreams and presentiments and warnings
that death was going to strike what was most precious to me, and day and
night and night and day I have groveled in the dirt before Him praying
Him to have pity on my innocent child and save it from harm--and here is
His answer!”

Why, He had saved it from harm--but she did not know.

She wiped the tears from her eyes and cheeks, and stood awhile gazing
down at the child and caressing its face and its hair with her hands;
then she spoke again in that bitter tone: “But in His hard heart is no
compassion. I will never pray again.”

She gathered her dead child to her bosom and strode away, the crowd
falling back to let her pass, and smitten dumb by the awful words they
had heard. Ah, that poor woman! It is as Satan said, we do not know good
fortune from bad, and are always mistaking the one for the other. Many
a time since I have heard people pray to God to spare the life of sick
persons, but I have never done it.

Both funerals took place at the same time in our little church next day.
Everybody was there, including the party guests. Satan was there, too;
which was proper, for it was on account of his efforts that the funerals
had happened. Nikolaus had departed this life without absolution, and
a collection was taken up for masses, to get him out of purgatory. Only
two-thirds of the required money was gathered, and the parents were
going to try to borrow the rest, but Satan furnished it. He told us
privately that there was no purgatory, but he had contributed in order
that Nikolaus's parents and their friends might be saved from worry and
distress. We thought it very good of him, but he said money did not cost
him anything.

At the graveyard the body of little Lisa was seized for debt by a
carpenter to whom the mother owed fifty groschen for work done the year
before. She had never been able to pay this, and was not able now. The
carpenter took the corpse home and kept it four days in his cellar,
the mother weeping and imploring about his house all the time; then he
buried it in his brother's cattle-yard, without religious ceremonies. It
drove the mother wild with grief and shame, and she forsook her work
and went daily about the town, cursing the carpenter and blaspheming
the laws of the emperor and the church, and it was pitiful to see. Seppi
asked Satan to interfere, but he said the carpenter and the rest were
members of the human race and were acting quite neatly for that species
of animal. He would interfere if he found a horse acting in such a way,
and we must inform him when we came across that kind of horse doing
that kind of human thing, so that he could stop it. We believed this was
sarcasm, for of course there wasn't any such horse.

But after a few days we found that we could not abide that poor woman's
distress, so we begged Satan to examine her several possible careers,
and see if he could not change her, to her profit, to a new one. He said
the longest of her careers as they now stood gave her forty-two years to
live, and her shortest one twenty-nine, and that both were charged with
grief and hunger and cold and pain. The only improvement he could make
would be to enable her to skip a certain three minutes from now; and
he asked us if he should do it. This was such a short time to decide in
that we went to pieces with nervous excitement, and before we could pull
ourselves together and ask for particulars he said the time would be up
in a few more seconds; so then we gasped out, “Do it!”

“It is done,” he said; “she was going around a corner; I have turned her
back; it has changed her career.”

“Then what will happen, Satan?”

“It is happening now. She is having words with Fischer, the weaver. In
his anger Fischer will straightway do what he would not have done but
for this accident. He was present when she stood over her child's body
and uttered those blasphemies.”

“What will he do?”

“He is doing it now--betraying her. In three days she will go to the
stake.”

We could not speak; we were frozen with horror, for if we had not
meddled with her career she would have been spared this awful fate.
Satan noticed these thoughts, and said:

“What you are thinking is strictly human-like--that is to say, foolish.
The woman is advantaged. Die when she might, she would go to heaven. By
this prompt death she gets twenty-nine years more of heaven than she is
entitled to, and escapes twenty-nine years of misery here.”

A moment before we were bitterly making up our minds that we would ask
no more favors of Satan for friends of ours, for he did not seem to
know any way to do a person a kindness but by killing him; but the whole
aspect of the case was changed now, and we were glad of what we had done
and full of happiness in the thought of it.

After a little I began to feel troubled about Fischer, and asked,
timidly, “Does this episode change Fischer's life-scheme, Satan?”

“Change it? Why, certainly. And radically. If he had not met Frau Brandt
awhile ago he would die next year, thirty-four years of age. Now he will
live to be ninety, and have a pretty prosperous and comfortable life of
it, as human lives go.”

We felt a great joy and pride in what we had done for Fischer, and were
expecting Satan to sympathize with this feeling; but he showed no sign
and this made us uneasy. We waited for him to speak, but he didn't; so,
to assuage our solicitude we had to ask him if there was any defect in
Fischer's good luck. Satan considered the question a moment, then said,
with some hesitation:

“Well, the fact is, it is a delicate point. Under his several former
possible life-careers he was going to heaven.”

We were aghast. “Oh, Satan! and under this one--”

“There, don't be so distressed. You were sincerely trying to do him a
kindness; let that comfort you.”

“Oh, dear, dear, that cannot comfort us. You ought to have told us what
we were doing, then we wouldn't have acted so.”

But it made no impression on him. He had never felt a pain or a sorrow,
and did not know what they were, in any really informing way. He had no
knowledge of them except theoretically--that is to say, intellectually.
And of course that is no good. One can never get any but a loose and
ignorant notion of such things except by experience. We tried our best
to make him comprehend the awful thing that had been done and how we
were compromised by it, but he couldn't seem to get hold of it. He said
he did not think it important where Fischer went to; in heaven he would
not be missed, there were “plenty there.” We tried to make him see that
he was missing the point entirely; that Fischer, and not other people,
was the proper one to decide about the importance of it; but it all went
for nothing; he said he did not care for Fischer--there were plenty more
Fischers.

The next minute Fischer went by on the other side of the way, and it
made us sick and faint to see him, remembering the doom that was upon
him, and we the cause of it. And how unconscious he was that anything
had happened to him! You could see by his elastic step and his alert
manner that he was well satisfied with himself for doing that hard
turn for poor Frau Brandt. He kept glancing back over his shoulder
expectantly. And, sure enough, pretty soon Frau Brandt followed after,
in charge of the officers and wearing jingling chains. A mob was in her
wake, jeering and shouting, “Blasphemer and heretic!” and some among
them were neighbors and friends of her happier days. Some were trying
to strike her, and the officers were not taking as much trouble as they
might to keep them from it.

“Oh, stop them, Satan!” It was out before we remembered that he
could not interrupt them for a moment without changing their whole
after-lives. He puffed a little puff toward them with his lips and they
began to reel and stagger and grab at the empty air; then they broke
apart and fled in every direction, shrieking, as if in intolerable pain.
He had crushed a rib of each of them with that little puff. We could not
help asking if their life-chart was changed.

“Yes, entirely. Some have gained years, some have lost them. Some few
will profit in various ways by the change, but only that few.”

We did not ask if we had brought poor Fischer's luck to any of them.
We did not wish to know. We fully believed in Satan's desire to do us
kindnesses, but we were losing confidence in his judgment. It was at
this time that our growing anxiety to have him look over our life-charts
and suggest improvements began to fade out and give place to other
interests.

For a day or two the whole village was a chattering turmoil over Frau
Brandt's case and over the mysterious calamity that had overtaken the
mob, and at her trial the place was crowded. She was easily convicted of
her blasphemies, for she uttered those terrible words again and said she
would not take them back. When warned that she was imperiling her life,
she said they could take it in welcome, she did not want it, she would
rather live with the professional devils in perdition than with these
imitators in the village. They accused her of breaking all those ribs
by witchcraft, and asked her if she was not a witch? She answered
scornfully:

“No. If I had that power would any of you holy hypocrites be alive five
minutes? No; I would strike you all dead. Pronounce your sentence and
let me go; I am tired of your society.”

So they found her guilty, and she was excommunicated and cut off from
the joys of heaven and doomed to the fires of hell; then she was clothed
in a coarse robe and delivered to the secular arm, and conducted to the
market-place, the bell solemnly tolling the while. We saw her chained to
the stake, and saw the first film of blue smoke rise on the still air.
Then her hard face softened, and she looked upon the packed crowd in
front of her and said, with gentleness:

“We played together once, in long-agone days when we were innocent
little creatures. For the sake of that, I forgive you.”

We went away then, and did not see the fires consume her, but we heard
the shrieks, although we put our fingers in our ears. When they ceased
we knew she was in heaven, notwithstanding the excommunication; and we
were glad of her death and not sorry that we had brought it about.

One day, a little while after this, Satan appeared again. We were always
watching out for him, for life was never very stagnant when he was by.
He came upon us at that place in the woods where we had first met him.
Being boys, we wanted to be entertained; we asked him to do a show for
us.

“Very well,” he said; “would you like to see a history of the progress
of the human race?--its development of that product which it calls
civilization?”

We said we should.

So, with a thought, he turned the place into the Garden of Eden, and we
saw Abel praying by his altar; then Cain came walking toward him with
his club, and did not seem to see us, and would have stepped on my foot
if I had not drawn it in. He spoke to his brother in a language which
we did not understand; then he grew violent and threatening, and we knew
what was going to happen, and turned away our heads for the moment; but
we heard the crash of the blows and heard the shrieks and the groans;
then there was silence, and we saw Abel lying in his blood and gasping
out his life, and Cain standing over him and looking down at him,
vengeful and unrepentant.

Then the vision vanished, and was followed by a long series of unknown
wars, murders, and massacres. Next we had the Flood, and the Ark tossing
around in the stormy waters, with lofty mountains in the distance
showing veiled and dim through the rain. Satan said:

“The progress of your race was not satisfactory. It is to have another
chance now.”

The scene changed, and we saw Noah overcome with wine.

Next, we had Sodom and Gomorrah, and “the attempt to discover two or
three respectable persons there,” as Satan described it. Next, Lot and
his daughters in the cave.

Next came the Hebraic wars, and we saw the victors massacre the
survivors and their cattle, and save the young girls alive and
distribute them around.

Next we had Jael; and saw her slip into the tent and drive the nail into
the temple of her sleeping guest; and we were so close that when the
blood gushed out it trickled in a little, red stream to our feet, and we
could have stained our hands in it if we had wanted to.

Next we had Egyptian wars, Greek wars, Roman wars, hideous drenchings
of the earth with blood; and we saw the treacheries of the Romans toward
the Carthaginians, and the sickening spectacle of the massacre of
those brave people. Also we saw Caesar invade Britain--“not that those
barbarians had done him any harm, but because he wanted their land, and
desired to confer the blessings of civilization upon their widows and
orphans,” as Satan explained.

Next, Christianity was born. Then ages of Europe passed in review before
us, and we saw Christianity and Civilization march hand in hand through
those ages, “leaving famine and death and desolation in their wake, and
other signs of the progress of the human race,” as Satan observed.

And always we had wars, and more wars, and still other wars--all over
Europe, all over the world. “Sometimes in the private interest of royal
families,” Satan said, “sometimes to crush a weak nation; but never a
war started by the aggressor for any clean purpose--there is no such war
in the history of the race.”

“Now,” said Satan, “you have seen your progress down to the present, and
you must confess that it is wonderful--in its way. We must now exhibit
the future.”

He showed us slaughters more terrible in their destruction of life, more
devastating in their engines of war, than any we had seen.

“You perceive,” he said, “that you have made continual progress. Cain
did his murder with a club; the Hebrews did their murders with javelins
and swords; the Greeks and Romans added protective armor and the fine
arts of military organization and generalship; the Christian has added
guns and gunpowder; a few centuries from now he will have so greatly
improved the deadly effectiveness of his weapons of slaughter that
all men will confess that without Christian civilization war must have
remained a poor and trifling thing to the end of time.”

Then he began to laugh in the most unfeeling way, and make fun of the
human race, although he knew that what he had been saying shamed us and
wounded us. No one but an angel could have acted so; but suffering is
nothing to them; they do not know what it is, except by hearsay.

More than once Seppi and I had tried in a humble and diffident way to
convert him, and as he had remained silent we had taken his silence as
a sort of encouragement; necessarily, then, this talk of his was a
disappointment to us, for it showed that we had made no deep impression
upon him. The thought made us sad, and we knew then how the missionary
must feel when he has been cherishing a glad hope and has seen it
blighted. We kept our grief to ourselves, knowing that this was not the
time to continue our work.

Satan laughed his unkind laugh to a finish; then he said: “It is a
remarkable progress. In five or six thousand years five or six high
civilizations have risen, flourished, commanded the wonder of the world,
then faded out and disappeared; and not one of them except the latest
ever invented any sweeping and adequate way to kill people. They all did
their best--to kill being the chiefest ambition of the human race
and the earliest incident in its history--but only the Christian
civilization has scored a triumph to be proud of. Two or three centuries
from now it will be recognized that all the competent killers are
Christians; then the pagan world will go to school to the Christian--not
to acquire his religion, but his guns. The Turk and the Chinaman will
buy those to kill missionaries and converts with.”

By this time his theater was at work again, and before our eyes nation
after nation drifted by, during two or three centuries, a mighty
procession, an endless procession, raging, struggling, wallowing through
seas of blood, smothered in battle-smoke through which the flags glinted
and the red jets from the cannon darted; and always we heard the thunder
of the guns and the cries of the dying.

“And what does it amount to?” said Satan, with his evil chuckle.
“Nothing at all. You gain nothing; you always come out where you went
in. For a million years the race has gone on monotonously propagating
itself and monotonously reperforming this dull nonsense--to what end?
No wisdom can guess! Who gets a profit out of it? Nobody but a parcel
of usurping little monarchs and nobilities who despise you; would feel
defiled if you touched them; would shut the door in your face if you
proposed to call; whom you slave for, fight for, die for, and are not
ashamed of it, but proud; whose existence is a perpetual insult to you
and you are afraid to resent it; who are mendicants supported by your
alms, yet assume toward you the airs of benefactor toward beggar; who
address you in the language of master to slave, and are answered in the
language of slave to master; who are worshiped by you with your mouth,
while in your heart--if you have one--you despise yourselves for it.
The first man was a hypocrite and a coward, qualities which have not yet
failed in his line; it is the foundation upon which all civilizations
have been built. Drink to their perpetuation! Drink to their
augmentation! Drink to--” Then he saw by our faces how much we were
hurt, and he cut his sentence short and stopped chuckling, and his
manner changed. He said, gently: “No, we will drink one another's
health, and let civilization go. The wine which has flown to our hands
out of space by desire is earthly, and good enough for that other toast;
but throw away the glasses; we will drink this one in wine which has not
visited this world before.”

We obeyed, and reached up and received the new cups as they descended.
They were shapely and beautiful goblets, but they were not made of any
material that we were acquainted with. They seemed to be in motion, they
seemed to be alive; and certainly the colors in them were in motion.
They were very brilliant and sparkling, and of every tint, and they were
never still, but flowed to and fro in rich tides which met and broke and
flashed out dainty explosions of enchanting color. I think it was most
like opals washing about in waves and flashing out their splendid fires.
But there is nothing to compare the wine with. We drank it, and felt a
strange and witching ecstasy as of heaven go stealing through us, and
Seppi's eyes filled and he said worshipingly:

“We shall be there some day, and then--”

He glanced furtively at Satan, and I think he hoped Satan would say,
“Yes, you will be there some day,” but Satan seemed to be thinking about
something else, and said nothing. This made me feel ghastly, for I knew
he had heard; nothing, spoken or unspoken, ever escaped him. Poor Seppi
looked distressed, and did not finish his remark. The goblets rose
and clove their way into the sky, a triplet of radiant sundogs, and
disappeared. Why didn't they stay? It seemed a bad sign, and depressed
me. Should I ever see mine again? Would Seppi ever see his?


Chapter 9

It was wonderful, the mastery Satan had over time and distance. For him
they did not exist. He called them human inventions, and said they were
artificialities. We often went to the most distant parts of the globe
with him, and stayed weeks and months, and yet were gone only a fraction
of a second, as a rule. You could prove it by the clock. One day when
our people were in such awful distress because the witch commission were
afraid to proceed against the astrologer and Father Peter's household,
or against any, indeed, but the poor and the friendless, they lost
patience and took to witch-hunting on their own score, and began to
chase a born lady who was known to have the habit of curing people by
devilish arts, such as bathing them, washing them, and nourishing them
instead of bleeding them and purging them through the ministrations of a
barber-surgeon in the proper way. She came flying down, with the howling
and cursing mob after her, and tried to take refuge in houses, but the
doors were shut in her face. They chased her more than half an hour, we
following to see it, and at last she was exhausted and fell, and they
caught her. They dragged her to a tree and threw a rope over the limb,
and began to make a noose in it, some holding her, meantime, and she
crying and begging, and her young daughter looking on and weeping, but
afraid to say or do anything.

They hanged the lady, and I threw a stone at her, although in my heart
I was sorry for her; but all were throwing stones and each was watching
his neighbor, and if I had not done as the others did it would have been
noticed and spoken of. Satan burst out laughing.

All that were near by turned upon him, astonished and not pleased.
It was an ill time to laugh, for his free and scoffing ways and his
supernatural music had brought him under suspicion all over the town and
turned many privately against him. The big blacksmith called attention
to him now, raising his voice so that all should hear, and said:

“What are you laughing at? Answer! Moreover, please explain to the
company why you threw no stone.”

“Are you sure I did not throw a stone?”

“Yes. You needn't try to get out of it; I had my eye on you.”

“And I--I noticed you!” shouted two others.

“Three witnesses,” said Satan: “Mueller, the blacksmith; Klein, the
butcher's man; Pfeiffer, the weaver's journeyman. Three very ordinary
liars. Are there any more?”

“Never mind whether there are others or not, and never mind about what
you consider us--three's enough to settle your matter for you. You'll
prove that you threw a stone, or it shall go hard with you.”

“That's so!” shouted the crowd, and surged up as closely as they could
to the center of interest.

“And first you will answer that other question,” cried the blacksmith,
pleased with himself for being mouthpiece to the public and hero of the
occasion. “What are you laughing at?”

Satan smiled and answered, pleasantly: “To see three cowards stoning a
dying lady when they were so near death themselves.”

You could see the superstitious crowd shrink and catch their breath,
under the sudden shock. The blacksmith, with a show of bravado, said:

“Pooh! What do you know about it?”

“I? Everything. By profession I am a fortune-teller, and I read the
hands of you three--and some others--when you lifted them to stone
the woman. One of you will die to-morrow week; another of you will die
to-night; the third has but five minutes to live--and yonder is the
clock!”

It made a sensation. The faces of the crowd blanched, and turned
mechanically toward the clock. The butcher and the weaver seemed smitten
with an illness, but the blacksmith braced up and said, with spirit:

“It is not long to wait for prediction number one. If it fails, young
master, you will not live a whole minute after, I promise you that.”

No one said anything; all watched the clock in a deep stillness which
was impressive. When four and a half minutes were gone the blacksmith
gave a sudden gasp and clapped his hands upon his heart, saying, “Give
me breath! Give me room!” and began to sink down. The crowd surged back,
no one offering to support him, and he fell lumbering to the ground and
was dead. The people stared at him, then at Satan, then at one another;
and their lips moved, but no words came. Then Satan said:

“Three saw that I threw no stone. Perhaps there are others; let them
speak.”

It struck a kind of panic into them, and, although no one answered him,
many began to violently accuse one another, saying, “You said he didn't
throw,” and getting for reply, “It is a lie, and I will make you eat
it!” And so in a moment they were in a raging and noisy turmoil,
and beating and banging one another; and in the midst was the only
indifferent one--the dead lady hanging from her rope, her troubles
forgotten, her spirit at peace.

So we walked away, and I was not at ease, but was saying to myself, “He
told them he was laughing at them, but it was a lie--he was laughing at
me.”

That made him laugh again, and he said, “Yes, I was laughing at you,
because, in fear of what others might report about you, you stoned the
woman when your heart revolted at the act--but I was laughing at the
others, too.”

“Why?”

“Because their case was yours.”

“How is that?”

“Well, there were sixty-eight people there, and sixty-two of them had no
more desire to throw a stone than you had.”

“Satan!”

“Oh, it's true. I know your race. It is made up of sheep. It is governed
by minorities, seldom or never by majorities. It suppresses its feelings
and its beliefs and follows the handful that makes the most noise.
Sometimes the noisy handful is right, sometimes wrong; but no matter,
the crowd follows it. The vast majority of the race, whether savage or
civilized, are secretly kind-hearted and shrink from inflicting pain,
but in the presence of the aggressive and pitiless minority they don't
dare to assert themselves. Think of it! One kind-hearted creature spies
upon another, and sees to it that he loyally helps in iniquities which
revolt both of them. Speaking as an expert, I know that ninety-nine out
of a hundred of your race were strongly against the killing of witches
when that foolishness was first agitated by a handful of pious lunatics
in the long ago. And I know that even to-day, after ages of transmitted
prejudice and silly teaching, only one person in twenty puts any real
heart into the harrying of a witch. And yet apparently everybody hates
witches and wants them killed. Some day a handful will rise up on the
other side and make the most noise--perhaps even a single daring man
with a big voice and a determined front will do it--and in a week all
the sheep will wheel and follow him, and witch-hunting will come to a
sudden end.

“Monarchies, aristocracies, and religions are all based upon that large
defect in your race--the individual's distrust of his neighbor, and his
desire, for safety's or comfort's sake, to stand well in his neighbor's
eye. These institutions will always remain, and always flourish, and
always oppress you, affront you, and degrade you, because you will
always be and remain slaves of minorities. There was never a country
where the majority of the people were in their secret hearts loyal to
any of these institutions.”

I did not like to hear our race called sheep, and said I did not think
they were.

“Still, it is true, lamb,” said Satan. “Look at you in war--what mutton
you are, and how ridiculous!”

“In war? How?”

“There has never been a just one, never an honorable one--on the part
of the instigator of the war. I can see a million years ahead, and this
rule will never change in so many as half a dozen instances. The
loud little handful--as usual--will shout for the war. The pulpit
will--warily and cautiously--object--at first; the great, big, dull bulk
of the nation will rub its sleepy eyes and try to make out why there
should be a war, and will say, earnestly and indignantly, “It is unjust
and dishonorable, and there is no necessity for it.” Then the handful
will shout louder. A few fair men on the other side will argue and
reason against the war with speech and pen, and at first will have a
hearing and be applauded; but it will not last long; those others will
outshout them, and presently the anti-war audiences will thin out
and lose popularity. Before long you will see this curious thing: the
speakers stoned from the platform, and free speech strangled by hordes
of furious men who in their secret hearts are still at one with those
stoned speakers--as earlier--but do not dare to say so. And now the
whole nation--pulpit and all--will take up the war-cry, and shout itself
hoarse, and mob any honest man who ventures to open his mouth; and
presently such mouths will cease to open. Next the statesmen will invent
cheap lies, putting the blame upon the nation that is attacked, and
every man will be glad of those conscience-soothing falsities, and will
diligently study them, and refuse to examine any refutations of them;
and thus he will by and by convince himself that the war is just, and
will thank God for the better sleep he enjoys after this process of
grotesque self-deception.”


Chapter 10

Days and days went by now, and no Satan. It was dull without him. But
the astrologer, who had returned from his excursion to the moon, went
about the village, braving public opinion, and getting a stone in the
middle of his back now and then when some witch-hater got a safe chance
to throw it and dodge out of sight. Meantime two influences had been
working well for Marget. That Satan, who was quite indifferent to her,
had stopped going to her house after a visit or two had hurt her pride,
and she had set herself the task of banishing him from her heart.
Reports of Wilhelm Meidling's dissipation brought to her from time to
time by old Ursula had touched her with remorse, jealousy of Satan
being the cause of it; and so now, these two matters working upon her
together, she was getting a good profit out of the combination--her
interest in Satan was steadily cooling, her interest in Wilhelm as
steadily warming. All that was needed to complete her conversion
was that Wilhelm should brace up and do something that should cause
favorable talk and incline the public toward him again.

The opportunity came now. Marget sent and asked him to defend her
uncle in the approaching trial, and he was greatly pleased, and stopped
drinking and began his preparations with diligence. With more diligence
than hope, in fact, for it was not a promising case. He had many
interviews in his office with Seppi and me, and threshed out our
testimony pretty thoroughly, thinking to find some valuable grains among
the chaff, but the harvest was poor, of course.

If Satan would only come! That was my constant thought. He could
invent some way to win the case; for he had said it would be won, so
he necessarily knew how it could be done. But the days dragged on, and
still he did not come. Of course I did not doubt that it would be won,
and that Father Peter would be happy for the rest of his life, since
Satan had said so; yet I knew I should be much more comfortable if he
would come and tell us how to manage it. It was getting high time for
Father Peter to have a saving change toward happiness, for by general
report he was worn out with his imprisonment and the ignominy that was
burdening him, and was like to die of his miseries unless he got relief
soon.

At last the trial came on, and the people gathered from all around to
witness it; among them many strangers from considerable distances. Yes,
everybody was there except the accused. He was too feeble in body for
the strain. But Marget was present, and keeping up her hope and her
spirit the best she could. The money was present, too. It was emptied
on the table, and was handled and caressed and examined by such as were
privileged.

The astrologer was put in the witness-box. He had on his best hat and
robe for the occasion.

QUESTION. You claim that this money is yours?

ANSWER. I do.

Q. How did you come by it?

A. I found the bag in the road when I was returning from a journey.

Q. When?

A. More than two years ago.

Q. What did you do with it?

A. I brought it home and hid it in a secret place in my observatory,
intending to find the owner if I could.

Q. You endeavored to find him?

A. I made diligent inquiry during several months, but nothing came of
it.

Q. And then?

A. I thought it not worth while to look further, and was minded to use
the money in finishing the wing of the foundling-asylum connected with
the priory and nunnery. So I took it out of its hiding-place and counted
it to see if any of it was missing. And then--

Q. Why do you stop? Proceed.

A. I am sorry to have to say this, but just as I had finished and was
restoring the bag to its place, I looked up and there stood Father Peter
behind me.

Several murmured, “That looks bad,” but others answered, “Ah, but he is
such a liar!”

Q. That made you uneasy?

A. No; I thought nothing of it at the time, for Father Peter often came
to me unannounced to ask for a little help in his need.

Marget blushed crimson at hearing her uncle falsely and impudently
charged with begging, especially from one he had always denounced as a
fraud, and was going to speak, but remembered herself in time and held
her peace.

Q. Proceed.

A. In the end I was afraid to contribute the money to the
foundling-asylum, but elected to wait yet another year and continue
my inquiries. When I heard of Father Peter's find I was glad, and no
suspicion entered my mind; when I came home a day or two later and
discovered that my own money was gone I still did not suspect until
three circumstances connected with Father Peter's good fortune struck me
as being singular coincidences.

Q. Pray name them.

A. Father Peter had found his money in a path--I had found mine in a
road. Father Peter's find consisted exclusively of gold ducats--mine
also. Father Peter found eleven hundred and seven ducats--I exactly the
same.

This closed his evidence, and certainly it made a strong impression on
the house; one could see that.

Wilhelm Meidling asked him some questions, then called us boys, and we
told our tale. It made the people laugh, and we were ashamed. We were
feeling pretty badly, anyhow, because Wilhelm was hopeless, and showed
it. He was doing as well as he could, poor young fellow, but nothing was
in his favor, and such sympathy as there was was now plainly not with
his client. It might be difficult for court and people to believe
the astrologer's story, considering his character, but it was almost
impossible to believe Father Peter's. We were already feeling badly
enough, but when the astrologer's lawyer said he believed he would not
ask us any questions--for our story was a little delicate and it would
be cruel for him to put any strain upon it--everybody tittered, and
it was almost more than we could bear. Then he made a sarcastic little
speech, and got so much fun out of our tale, and it seemed so ridiculous
and childish and every way impossible and foolish, that it made
everybody laugh till the tears came; and at last Marget could not keep
up her courage any longer, but broke down and cried, and I was so sorry
for her.

Now I noticed something that braced me up. It was Satan standing
alongside of Wilhelm! And there was such a contrast!--Satan looked so
confident, had such a spirit in his eyes and face, and Wilhelm looked so
depressed and despondent. We two were comfortable now, and judged that
he would testify and persuade the bench and the people that black was
white and white black, or any other color he wanted it. We glanced
around to see what the strangers in the house thought of him, for he was
beautiful, you know--stunning, in fact--but no one was noticing him; so
we knew by that that he was invisible.

The lawyer was saying his last words; and while he was saying them Satan
began to melt into Wilhelm. He melted into him and disappeared; and then
there was a change, when his spirit began to look out of Wilhelm's eyes.

That lawyer finished quite seriously, and with dignity. He pointed to
the money, and said:

“The love of it is the root of all evil. There it lies, the ancient
tempter, newly red with the shame of its latest victory--the dishonor of
a priest of God and his two poor juvenile helpers in crime. If it could
but speak, let us hope that it would be constrained to confess that of
all its conquests this was the basest and the most pathetic.”

He sat down. Wilhelm rose and said:

“From the testimony of the accuser I gather that he found this money
in a road more than two years ago. Correct me, sir, if I misunderstood
you.”

The astrologer said his understanding of it was correct.

“And the money so found was never out of his hands thenceforth up to a
certain definite date--the last day of last year. Correct me, sir, if I
am wrong.”

The astrologer nodded his head. Wilhelm turned to the bench and said:

“If I prove that this money here was not that money, then it is not
his?”

“Certainly not; but this is irregular. If you had such a witness it was
your duty to give proper notice of it and have him here to--” He broke
off and began to consult with the other judges. Meantime that other
lawyer got up excited and began to protest against allowing new
witnesses to be brought into the case at this late stage.

The judges decided that his contention was just and must be allowed.

“But this is not a new witness,” said Wilhelm. “It has already been
partly examined. I speak of the coin.”

“The coin? What can the coin say?”

“It can say it is not the coin that the astrologer once possessed. It
can say it was not in existence last December. By its date it can say
this.”

And it was so! There was the greatest excitement in the court while that
lawyer and the judges were reaching for coins and examining them and
exclaiming. And everybody was full of admiration of Wilhelm's brightness
in happening to think of that neat idea. At last order was called and
the court said:

“All of the coins but four are of the date of the present year. The
court tenders its sincere sympathy to the accused, and its deep regret
that he, an innocent man, through an unfortunate mistake, has suffered
the undeserved humiliation of imprisonment and trial. The case is
dismissed.”

So the money could speak, after all, though that lawyer thought it
couldn't. The court rose, and almost everybody came forward to shake
hands with Marget and congratulate her, and then to shake with Wilhelm
and praise him; and Satan had stepped out of Wilhelm and was standing
around looking on full of interest, and people walking through him every
which way, not knowing he was there. And Wilhelm could not explain why
he only thought of the date on the coins at the last moment, instead
of earlier; he said it just occurred to him, all of a sudden, like an
inspiration, and he brought it right out without any hesitation, for,
although he didn't examine the coins, he seemed, somehow, to know it was
true. That was honest of him, and like him; another would have pretended
he had thought of it earlier, and was keeping it back for a surprise.

He had dulled down a little now; not much, but still you could notice
that he hadn't that luminous look in his eyes that he had while Satan
was in him. He nearly got it back, though, for a moment when Marget came
and praised him and thanked him and couldn't keep him from seeing how
proud she was of him. The astrologer went off dissatisfied and cursing,
and Solomon Isaacs gathered up the money and carried it away. It was
Father Peter's for good and all, now.

Satan was gone. I judged that he had spirited himself away to the jail
to tell the prisoner the news; and in this I was right. Marget and
the rest of us hurried thither at our best speed, in a great state of
rejoicing.

Well, what Satan had done was this: he had appeared before that
poor prisoner, exclaiming, “The trial is over, and you stand forever
disgraced as a thief--by verdict of the court!”

The shock unseated the old man's reason. When we arrived, ten minutes
later, he was parading pompously up and down and delivering commands to
this and that and the other constable or jailer, and calling them Grand
chamberlain, and Prince This and Prince That, and Admiral of the Fleet,
Field Marshal in Command, and all such fustian, and was as happy as a
bird. He thought he was Emperor!

Marget flung herself on his breast and cried, and indeed everybody
was moved almost to heartbreak. He recognized Marget, but could not
understand why she should cry. He patted her on the shoulder and said:

“Don't do it, dear; remember, there are witnesses, and it is not
becoming in the Crown Princess. Tell me your trouble--it shall be
mended; there is nothing the Emperor cannot do.” Then he looked around
and saw old Ursula with her apron to her eyes. He was puzzled at that,
and said, “And what is the matter with you?”

Through her sobs she got out words explaining that she was distressed to
see him--“so.” He reflected over that a moment, then muttered, as if to
himself: “A singular old thing, the Dowager Duchess--means well, but is
always snuffling and never able to tell what it is about. It is because
she doesn't know.” His eyes fell on Wilhelm. “Prince of India,” he said,
“I divine that it is you that the Crown Princess is concerned about.
Her tears shall be dried; I will no longer stand between you; she shall
share your throne; and between you you shall inherit mine. There, little
lady, have I done well? You can smile now--isn't it so?”

He petted Marget and kissed her, and was so contented with himself and
with everybody that he could not do enough for us all, but began to give
away kingdoms and such things right and left, and the least that any of
us got was a principality. And so at last, being persuaded to go home,
he marched in imposing state; and when the crowds along the way saw how
it gratified him to be hurrahed at, they humored him to the top of his
desire, and he responded with condescending bows and gracious smiles,
and often stretched out a hand and said, “Bless you, my people!”

As pitiful a sight as ever I saw. And Marget, and old Ursula crying all
the way.

On my road home I came upon Satan, and reproached him with deceiving
me with that lie. He was not embarrassed, but said, quite simply and
composedly:

“Ah, you mistake; it was the truth. I said he would be happy the rest of
his days, and he will, for he will always think he is the Emperor, and
his pride in it and his joy in it will endure to the end. He is now, and
will remain, the one utterly happy person in this empire.”

“But the method of it, Satan, the method! Couldn't you have done it
without depriving him of his reason?”

It was difficult to irritate Satan, but that accomplished it.

“What an ass you are!” he said. “Are you so unobservant as not to have
found out that sanity and happiness are an impossible combination?
No sane man can be happy, for to him life is real, and he sees what a
fearful thing it is. Only the mad can be happy, and not many of those.
The few that imagine themselves kings or gods are happy, the rest are no
happier than the sane. Of course, no man is entirely in his right mind
at any time, but I have been referring to the extreme cases. I have
taken from this man that trumpery thing which the race regards as a
Mind; I have replaced his tin life with a silver-gilt fiction; you
see the result--and you criticize! I said I would make him permanently
happy, and I have done it. I have made him happy by the only means
possible to his race--and you are not satisfied!” He heaved a
discouraged sigh, and said, “It seems to me that this race is hard to
please.”

There it was, you see. He didn't seem to know any way to do a person
a favor except by killing him or making a lunatic out of him. I
apologized, as well as I could; but privately I did not think much of
his processes--at that time.

Satan was accustomed to say that our race lived a life of continuous and
uninterrupted self-deception. It duped itself from cradle to grave with
shams and delusions which it mistook for realities, and this made its
entire life a sham. Of the score of fine qualities which it imagined it
had and was vain of, it really possessed hardly one. It regarded
itself as gold, and was only brass. One day when he was in this vein
he mentioned a detail--the sense of humor. I cheered up then, and took
issue. I said we possessed it.

“There spoke the race!” he said; “always ready to claim what it hasn't
got, and mistake its ounce of brass filings for a ton of gold-dust. You
have a mongrel perception of humor, nothing more; a multitude of you
possess that. This multitude see the comic side of a thousand low-grade
and trivial things--broad incongruities, mainly; grotesqueries,
absurdities, evokers of the horse-laugh. The ten thousand high-grade
comicalities which exist in the world are sealed from their dull
vision. Will a day come when the race will detect the funniness of these
juvenilities and laugh at them--and by laughing at them destroy them?
For your race, in its poverty, has unquestionably one really
effective weapon--laughter. Power, money, persuasion, supplication,
persecution--these can lift at a colossal humbug--push it a
little--weaken it a little, century by century; but only laughter can
blow it to rags and atoms at a blast. Against the assault of laughter
nothing can stand. You are always fussing and fighting with your other
weapons. Do you ever use that one? No; you leave it lying rusting. As a
race, do you ever use it at all? No; you lack sense and the courage.”

We were traveling at the time and stopped at a little city in India and
looked on while a juggler did his tricks before a group of natives. They
were wonderful, but I knew Satan could beat that game, and I begged him
to show off a little, and he said he would. He changed himself into a
native in turban and breech-cloth, and very considerately conferred on
me a temporary knowledge of the language.

The juggler exhibited a seed, covered it with earth in a small
flower-pot, then put a rag over the pot; after a minute the rag began to
rise; in ten minutes it had risen a foot; then the rag was removed and a
little tree was exposed, with leaves upon it and ripe fruit. We ate the
fruit, and it was good. But Satan said:

“Why do you cover the pot? Can't you grow the tree in the sunlight?”

“No,” said the juggler; “no one can do that.”

“You are only an apprentice; you don't know your trade. Give me the
seed. I will show you.” He took the seed and said, “What shall I raise
from it?”

“It is a cherry seed; of course you will raise a cherry.”

“Oh no; that is a trifle; any novice can do that. Shall I raise an
orange-tree from it?”

“Oh yes!” and the juggler laughed.

“And shall I make it bear other fruits as well as oranges?”

“If God wills!” and they all laughed.

Satan put the seed in the ground, put a handful of dust on it, and said,
“Rise!”

A tiny stem shot up and began to grow, and grew so fast that in five
minutes it was a great tree, and we were sitting in the shade of it.
There was a murmur of wonder, then all looked up and saw a strange and
pretty sight, for the branches were heavy with fruits of many kinds and
colors--oranges, grapes, bananas, peaches, cherries, apricots, and so
on. Baskets were brought, and the unlading of the tree began; and
the people crowded around Satan and kissed his hand, and praised him,
calling him the prince of jugglers. The news went about the town, and
everybody came running to see the wonder--and they remembered to bring
baskets, too. But the tree was equal to the occasion; it put out new
fruits as fast as any were removed; baskets were filled by the score and
by the hundred, but always the supply remained undiminished. At last a
foreigner in white linen and sun-helmet arrived, and exclaimed, angrily:

“Away from here! Clear out, you dogs; the tree is on my lands and is my
property.”

The natives put down their baskets and made humble obeisance. Satan made
humble obeisance, too, with his fingers to his forehead, in the native
way, and said:

“Please let them have their pleasure for an hour, sir--only that, and
no longer. Afterward you may forbid them; and you will still have more
fruit than you and the state together can consume in a year.”

This made the foreigner very angry, and he cried out, “Who are you, you
vagabond, to tell your betters what they may do and what they mayn't!”
 and he struck Satan with his cane and followed this error with a kick.

The fruits rotted on the branches, and the leaves withered and fell. The
foreigner gazed at the bare limbs with the look of one who is surprised,
and not gratified. Satan said:

“Take good care of the tree, for its health and yours are bound
together. It will never bear again, but if you tend it well it will live
long. Water its roots once in each hour every night--and do it yourself;
it must not be done by proxy, and to do it in daylight will not answer.
If you fail only once in any night, the tree will die, and you likewise.
Do not go home to your own country any more--you would not reach there;
make no business or pleasure engagements which require you to go outside
your gate at night--you cannot afford the risk; do not rent or sell this
place--it would be injudicious.”

The foreigner was proud and wouldn't beg, but I thought he looked as if
he would like to. While he stood gazing at Satan we vanished away and
landed in Ceylon.

I was sorry for that man; sorry Satan hadn't been his customary self
and killed him or made him a lunatic. It would have been a mercy. Satan
overheard the thought, and said:

“I would have done it but for his wife, who has not offended me. She is
coming to him presently from their native land, Portugal. She is well,
but has not long to live, and has been yearning to see him and persuade
him to go back with her next year. She will die without knowing he can't
leave that place.”

“He won't tell her?”

“He? He will not trust that secret with any one; he will reflect that
it could be revealed in sleep, in the hearing of some Portuguese guest's
servant some time or other.”

“Did none of those natives understand what you said to him?”

“None of them understood, but he will always be afraid that some of them
did. That fear will be torture to him, for he has been a harsh master
to them. In his dreams he will imagine them chopping his tree down.
That will make his days uncomfortable--I have already arranged for his
nights.”

It grieved me, though not sharply, to see him take such a malicious
satisfaction in his plans for this foreigner.

“Does he believe what you told him, Satan?”

“He thought he didn't, but our vanishing helped. The tree, where there
had been no tree before--that helped. The insane and uncanny variety of
fruits--the sudden withering--all these things are helps. Let him think
as he may, reason as he may, one thing is certain, he will water the
tree. But between this and night he will begin his changed career with a
very natural precaution--for him.”

“What is that?”

“He will fetch a priest to cast out the tree's devil. You are such a
humorous race--and don't suspect it.”

“Will he tell the priest?”

“No. He will say a juggler from Bombay created it, and that he wants the
juggler's devil driven out of it, so that it will thrive and be fruitful
again. The priest's incantations will fail; then the Portuguese will
give up that scheme and get his watering-pot ready.”

“But the priest will burn the tree. I know it; he will not allow it to
remain.”

“Yes, and anywhere in Europe he would burn the man, too. But in India
the people are civilized, and these things will not happen. The man will
drive the priest away and take care of the tree.”

I reflected a little, then said, “Satan, you have given him a hard life,
I think.”

“Comparatively. It must not be mistaken for a holiday.”

We flitted from place to place around the world as we had done before,
Satan showing me a hundred wonders, most of them reflecting in some
way the weakness and triviality of our race. He did this now every few
days--not out of malice--I am sure of that--it only seemed to amuse and
interest him, just as a naturalist might be amused and interested by a
collection of ants.


Chapter 11

For as much as a year Satan continued these visits, but at last he came
less often, and then for a long time he did not come at all. This always
made me lonely and melancholy. I felt that he was losing interest in our
tiny world and might at any time abandon his visits entirely. When one
day he finally came to me I was overjoyed, but only for a little while.
He had come to say good-by, he told me, and for the last time. He had
investigations and undertakings in other corners of the universe, he
said, that would keep him busy for a longer period than I could wait for
his return.

“And you are going away, and will not come back any more?”

“Yes,” he said. “We have comraded long together, and it has been
pleasant--pleasant for both; but I must go now, and we shall not see
each other any more.”

“In this life, Satan, but in another? We shall meet in another, surely?”

Then, all tranquilly and soberly, he made the strange answer, “There is
no other.”

A subtle influence blew upon my spirit from his, bringing with it a
vague, dim, but blessed and hopeful feeling that the incredible words
might be true--even must be true.

“Have you never suspected this, Theodor?”

“No. How could I? But if it can only be true--”

“It is true.”

A gust of thankfulness rose in my breast, but a doubt checked it before
it could issue in words, and I said, “But--but--we have seen that future
life--seen it in its actuality, and so--”

“It was a vision--it had no existence.”

I could hardly breathe for the great hope that was struggling in me. “A
vision?--a vi--”

“Life itself is only a vision, a dream.”

It was electrical. By God! I had had that very thought a thousand times
in my musings!

“Nothing exists; all is a dream. God--man--the world--the sun, the moon,
the wilderness of stars--a dream, all a dream; they have no existence.
Nothing exists save empty space--and you!”

“I!”

“And you are not you--you have no body, no blood, no bones, you are but
a thought. I myself have no existence; I am but a dream--your dream,
creature of your imagination. In a moment you will have realized this,
then you will banish me from your visions and I shall dissolve into the
nothingness out of which you made me....

“I am perishing already--I am failing--I am passing away. In a little
while you will be alone in shoreless space, to wander its limitless
solitudes without friend or comrade forever--for you will remain a
thought, the only existent thought, and by your nature inextinguishable,
indestructible. But I, your poor servant, have revealed you to yourself
and set you free. Dream other dreams, and better!

“Strange! that you should not have suspected years ago--centuries,
ages, eons, ago!--for you have existed, companionless, through all the
eternities. Strange, indeed, that you should not have suspected that
your universe and its contents were only dreams, visions, fiction!
Strange, because they are so frankly and hysterically insane--like
all dreams: a God who could make good children as easily as bad, yet
preferred to make bad ones; who could have made every one of them happy,
yet never made a single happy one; who made them prize their bitter
life, yet stingily cut it short; who gave his angels eternal happiness
unearned, yet required his other children to earn it; who gave his
angels painless lives, yet cursed his other children with biting
miseries and maladies of mind and body; who mouths justice and
invented hell--mouths mercy and invented hell--mouths Golden Rules, and
forgiveness multiplied by seventy times seven, and invented hell; who
mouths morals to other people and has none himself; who frowns upon
crimes, yet commits them all; who created man without invitation, then
tries to shuffle the responsibility for man's acts upon man, instead of
honorably placing it where it belongs, upon himself; and finally, with
altogether divine obtuseness, invites this poor, abused slave to worship
him!...

“You perceive, now, that these things are all impossible except in a
dream. You perceive that they are pure and puerile insanities, the silly
creations of an imagination that is not conscious of its freaks--in a
word, that they are a dream, and you the maker of it. The dream-marks
are all present; you should have recognized them earlier.

“It is true, that which I have revealed to you; there is no God, no
universe, no human race, no earthly life, no heaven, no hell. It is all
a dream--a grotesque and foolish dream. Nothing exists but you. And
you are but a thought--a vagrant thought, a useless thought, a homeless
thought, wandering forlorn among the empty eternities!”

He vanished, and left me appalled; for I knew, and realized, that all he
had said was true.





A FABLE

Once upon a time an artist who had painted a small and very beautiful
picture placed it so that he could see it in the mirror. He said, “This
doubles the distance and softens it, and it is twice as lovely as it was
before.”

The animals out in the woods heard of this through the housecat, who was
greatly admired by them because he was so learned, and so refined and
civilized, and so polite and high-bred, and could tell them so much
which they didn't know before, and were not certain about afterward.
They were much excited about this new piece of gossip, and they asked
questions, so as to get at a full understanding of it. They asked what a
picture was, and the cat explained.

“It is a flat thing,” he said; “wonderfully flat, marvelously flat,
enchantingly flat and elegant. And, oh, so beautiful!”

That excited them almost to a frenzy, and they said they would give the
world to see it. Then the bear asked:

“What is it that makes it so beautiful?”

“It is the looks of it,” said the cat.

This filled them with admiration and uncertainty, and they were more
excited than ever. Then the cow asked:

“What is a mirror?”

“It is a hole in the wall,” said the cat. “You look in it, and there
you see the picture, and it is so dainty and charming and ethereal and
inspiring in its unimaginable beauty that your head turns round and
round, and you almost swoon with ecstasy.”

The ass had not said anything as yet; he now began to throw doubts.
He said there had never been anything as beautiful as this before, and
probably wasn't now. He said that when it took a whole basketful of
sesquipedalian adjectives to whoop up a thing of beauty, it was time for
suspicion.

It was easy to see that these doubts were having an effect upon the
animals, so the cat went off offended. The subject was dropped for a
couple of days, but in the meantime curiosity was taking a fresh start,
and there was a revival of interest perceptible. Then the animals
assailed the ass for spoiling what could possibly have been a pleasure
to them, on a mere suspicion that the picture was not beautiful, without
any evidence that such was the case. The ass was not troubled; he
was calm, and said there was one way to find out who was in the right,
himself or the cat: he would go and look in that hole, and come back and
tell what he found there. The animals felt relieved and grateful, and
asked him to go at once--which he did.

But he did not know where he ought to stand; and so, through error,
he stood between the picture and the mirror. The result was that the
picture had no chance, and didn't show up. He returned home and said:

“The cat lied. There was nothing in that hole but an ass. There wasn't
a sign of a flat thing visible. It was a handsome ass, and friendly, but
just an ass, and nothing more.”

The elephant asked:

“Did you see it good and clear? Were you close to it?”

“I saw it good and clear, O Hathi, King of Beasts. I was so close that I
touched noses with it.”

“This is very strange,” said the elephant; “the cat was always truthful
before--as far as we could make out. Let another witness try. Go, Baloo,
look in the hole, and come and report.”

So the bear went. When he came back, he said:

“Both the cat and the ass have lied; there was nothing in the hole but a
bear.”

Great was the surprise and puzzlement of the animals. Each was now
anxious to make the test himself and get at the straight truth. The
elephant sent them one at a time.

First, the cow. She found nothing in the hole but a cow.

The tiger found nothing in it but a tiger.

The lion found nothing in it but a lion.

The leopard found nothing in it but a leopard.

The camel found a camel, and nothing more.

Then Hathi was wroth, and said he would have the truth, if he had to go
and fetch it himself. When he returned, he abused his whole subjectry
for liars, and was in an unappeasable fury with the moral and mental
blindness of the cat. He said that anybody but a near-sighted fool could
see that there was nothing in the hole but an elephant.

                            MORAL, BY THE CAT

You can find in a text whatever you bring, if you will stand between it
and the mirror of your imagination. You may not see your ears, but they
will be there.






HUNTING THE DECEITFUL TURKEY

When I was a boy my uncle and his big boys hunted with the rifle, the
youngest boy Fred and I with a shotgun--a small single-barrelled shotgun
which was properly suited to our size and strength; it was not much
heavier than a broom. We carried it turn about, half an hour at a time.
I was not able to hit anything with it, but I liked to try. Fred and
I hunted feathered small game, the others hunted deer, squirrels, wild
turkeys, and such things. My uncle and the big boys were good shots.
They killed hawks and wild geese and such like on the wing; and they
didn't wound or kill squirrels, they stunned them. When the dogs treed
a squirrel, the squirrel would scamper aloft and run out on a limb
and flatten himself along it, hoping to make himself invisible in
that way--and not quite succeeding. You could see his wee little ears
sticking up. You couldn't see his nose, but you knew where it was. Then
the hunter, despising a “rest” for his rifle, stood up and took
offhand aim at the limb and sent a bullet into it immediately under
the squirrel's nose, and down tumbled the animal, unwounded, but
unconscious; the dogs gave him a shake and he was dead. Sometimes when
the distance was great and the wind not accurately allowed for, the
bullet would hit the squirrel's head; the dogs could do as they pleased
with that one--the hunter's pride was hurt, and he wouldn't allow it to
go into the gamebag.

In the first faint gray of the dawn the stately wild turkeys would be
stalking around in great flocks, and ready to be sociable and answer
invitations to come and converse with other excursionists of their kind.
The hunter concealed himself and imitated the turkey-call by sucking
the air through the leg-bone of a turkey which had previously answered
a call like that and lived only just long enough to regret it. There is
nothing that furnishes a perfect turkey-call except that bone. Another
of Nature's treacheries, you see. She is full of them; half the time she
doesn't know which she likes best--to betray her child or protect it.
In the case of the turkey she is badly mixed: she gives it a bone to be
used in getting it into trouble, and she also furnishes it with a trick
for getting itself out of the trouble again. When a mamma-turkey answers
an invitation and finds she has made a mistake in accepting it, she does
as the mamma-partridge does--remembers a previous engagement--and goes
limping and scrambling away, pretending to be very lame; and at the same
time she is saying to her not-visible children, “Lie low, keep still,
don't expose yourselves; I shall be back as soon as I have beguiled this
shabby swindler out of the country.”

When a person is ignorant and confiding, this immoral device can
have tiresome results. I followed an ostensibly lame turkey over a
considerable part of the United States one morning, because I believed
in her and could not think she would deceive a mere boy, and one who
was trusting her and considering her honest. I had the single-barrelled
shotgun, but my idea was to catch her alive. I often got within rushing
distance of her, and then made my rush; but always, just as I made my
final plunge and put my hand down where her back had been, it wasn't
there; it was only two or three inches from there and I brushed the
tail-feathers as I landed on my stomach--a very close call, but still
not quite close enough; that is, not close enough for success, but just
close enough to convince me that I could do it next time. She always
waited for me, a little piece away, and let on to be resting and greatly
fatigued; which was a lie, but I believed it, for I still thought her
honest long after I ought to have begun to doubt her, suspecting that
this was no way for a high-minded bird to be acting. I followed, and
followed, and followed, making my periodical rushes, and getting up and
brushing the dust off, and resuming the voyage with patient confidence;
indeed, with a confidence which grew, for I could see by the change of
climate and vegetation that we were getting up into the high latitudes,
and as she always looked a little tireder and a little more discouraged
after each rush, I judged that I was safe to win, in the end, the
competition being purely a matter of staying power and the advantage
lying with me from the start because she was lame.

Along in the afternoon I began to feel fatigued myself. Neither of us
had had any rest since we first started on the excursion, which was
upwards of ten hours before, though latterly we had paused awhile after
rushes, I letting on to be thinking about something else; but neither of
us sincere, and both of us waiting for the other to call game but in no
real hurry about it, for indeed those little evanescent snatches of rest
were very grateful to the feelings of us both; it would naturally be
so, skirmishing along like that ever since dawn and not a bite in the
meantime; at least for me, though sometimes as she lay on her side
fanning herself with a wing and praying for strength to get out of this
difficulty a grasshopper happened along whose time had come, and that
was well for her, and fortunate, but I had nothing--nothing the whole
day.

More than once, after I was very tired, I gave up taking her alive, and
was going to shoot her, but I never did it, although it was my right,
for I did not believe I could hit her; and besides, she always stopped
and posed, when I raised the gun, and this made me suspicious that
she knew about me and my marksmanship, and so I did not care to expose
myself to remarks.

I did not get her, at all. When she got tired of the game at last, she
rose from almost under my hand and flew aloft with the rush and whir
of a shell and lit on the highest limb of a great tree and sat down and
crossed her legs and smiled down at me, and seemed gratified to see me
so astonished.

I was ashamed, and also lost; and it was while wandering the woods
hunting for myself that I found a deserted log cabin and had one of
the best meals there that in my life-days I have eaten. The weed-grown
garden was full of ripe tomatoes, and I ate them ravenously, though I
had never liked them before. Not more than two or three times since have
I tasted anything that was so delicious as those tomatoes. I surfeited
myself with them, and did not taste another one until I was in middle
life. I can eat them now, but I do not like the look of them. I suppose
we have all experienced a surfeit at one time or another. Once, in
stress of circumstances, I ate part of a barrel of sardines, there being
nothing else at hand, but since then I have always been able to get
along without sardines.






THE McWILLIAMSES AND THE BURGLAR ALARM

The conversation drifted smoothly and pleasantly along from weather
to crops, from crops to literature, from literature to scandal, from
scandal to religion; then took a random jump, and landed on the subject
of burglar alarms. And now for the first time Mr. McWilliams showed
feeling. Whenever I perceive this sign on this man's dial, I comprehend
it, and lapse into silence, and give him opportunity to unload his
heart. Said he, with but ill-controlled emotion:

“I do not go one single cent on burglar alarms, Mr. Twain--not a single
cent--and I will tell you why. When we were finishing our house, we
found we had a little cash left over, on account of the plumber not
knowing it. I was for enlightening the heathen with it, for I was always
unaccountably down on the heathen somehow; but Mrs. McWilliams said no,
let's have a burglar alarm. I agreed to this compromise. I will explain
that whenever I want a thing, and Mrs. McWilliams wants another thing,
and we decide upon the thing that Mrs. McWilliams wants--as we always
do--she calls that a compromise. Very well: the man came up from New
York and put in the alarm, and charged three hundred and twenty-five
dollars for it, and said we could sleep without uneasiness now. So we
did for awhile--say a month. Then one night we smelled smoke, and I
was advised to get up and see what the matter was. I lit a candle, and
started toward the stairs, and met a burglar coming out of a room with
a basket of tinware, which he had mistaken for solid silver in the dark.
He was smoking a pipe. I said, 'My friend, we do not allow smoking in
this room.' He said he was a stranger, and could not be expected to know
the rules of the house: said he had been in many houses just as good as
this one, and it had never been objected to before. He added that as far
as his experience went, such rules had never been considered to apply to
burglars, anyway.

“I said: 'Smoke along, then, if it is the custom, though I think that
the conceding of a privilege to a burglar which is denied to a bishop is
a conspicuous sign of the looseness of the times. But waiving all that,
what business have you to be entering this house in this furtive and
clandestine way, without ringing the burglar alarm?'

“He looked confused and ashamed, and said, with embarrassment: 'I beg a
thousand pardons. I did not know you had a burglar alarm, else I would
have rung it. I beg you will not mention it where my parents may hear of
it, for they are old and feeble, and such a seemingly wanton breach of
the hallowed conventionalities of our Christian civilization might all
too rudely sunder the frail bridge which hangs darkling between the pale
and evanescent present and the solemn great deeps of the eternities. May
I trouble you for a match?'

“I said: 'Your sentiments do you honor, but if you will allow me to say
it, metaphor is not your best hold. Spare your thigh; this kind light
only on the box, and seldom there, in fact, if my experience may be
trusted. But to return to business: how did you get in here?'

“'Through a second-story window.'

“It was even so. I redeemed the tinware at pawnbroker's rates, less cost
of advertising, bade the burglar good-night, closed the window after
him, and retired to headquarters to report. Next morning we sent for
the burglar-alarm man, and he came up and explained that the reason the
alarm did not 'go off' was that no part of the house but the first floor
was attached to the alarm. This was simply idiotic; one might as well
have no armor on at all in battle as to have it only on his legs.
The expert now put the whole second story on the alarm, charged three
hundred dollars for it, and went his way. By and by, one night, I found
a burglar in the third story, about to start down a ladder with a lot
of miscellaneous property. My first impulse was to crack his head with a
billiard cue; but my second was to refrain from this attention, because
he was between me and the cue rack. The second impulse was plainly the
soundest, so I refrained, and proceeded to compromise. I redeemed the
property at former rates, after deducting ten per cent. for use of
ladder, it being my ladder, and, next day we sent down for the expert
once more, and had the third story attached to the alarm, for three
hundred dollars.

“By this time the 'annunciator' had grown to formidable dimensions. It
had forty-seven tags on it, marked with the names of the various rooms
and chimneys, and it occupied the space of an ordinary wardrobe. The
gong was the size of a wash-bowl, and was placed above the head of our
bed. There was a wire from the house to the coachman's quarters in the
stable, and a noble gong alongside his pillow.

“We should have been comfortable now but for one defect. Every morning
at five the cook opened the kitchen door, in the way of business, and
rip went that gong! The first time this happened I thought the last
day was come sure. I didn't think it in bed--no, but out of it--for the
first effect of that frightful gong is to hurl you across the house, and
slam you against the wall, and then curl you up, and squirm you like a
spider on a stove lid, till somebody shuts the kitchen door. In solid
fact, there is no clamor that is even remotely comparable to the dire
clamor which that gong makes. Well, this catastrophe happened every
morning regularly at five o'clock, and lost us three hours sleep; for,
mind you, when that thing wakes you, it doesn't merely wake you in
spots; it wakes you all over, conscience and all, and you are good for
eighteen hours of wide-awakeness subsequently--eighteen hours of the
very most inconceivable wide-awakeness that you ever experienced in your
life. A stranger died on our hands one time, and we vacated and left him
in our room overnight. Did that stranger wait for the general judgment?
No, sir; he got up at five the next morning in the most prompt and
unostentatious way. I knew he would; I knew it mighty well. He collected
his life-insurance, and lived happy ever after, for there was plenty of
proof as to the perfect squareness of his death.

“Well, we were gradually fading toward a better land, on account of the
daily loss of sleep; so we finally had the expert up again, and he ran
a wire to the outside of the door, and placed a switch there, whereby
Thomas, the butler, always made one little mistake--he switched the
alarm off at night when he went to bed, and switched it on again at
daybreak in the morning, just in time for the cook to open the kitchen
door, and enable that gong to slam us across the house, sometimes
breaking a window with one or the other of us. At the end of a week we
recognized that this switch business was a delusion and a snare. We also
discovered that a band of burglars had been lodging in the house the
whole time--not exactly to steal, for there wasn't much left now, but
to hide from the police, for they were hot pressed, and they shrewdly
judged that the detectives would never think of a tribe of burglars
taking sanctuary in a house notoriously protected by the most imposing
and elaborate burglar alarm in America.

“Sent down for the expert again, and this time he struck a most dazzling
idea--he fixed the thing so that opening the kitchen door would take
off the alarm. It was a noble idea, and he charged accordingly. But
you already foresee the result. I switched on the alarm every night at
bed-time, no longer trusting on Thomas's frail memory; and as soon as
the lights were out the burglars walked in at the kitchen door, thus
taking the alarm off without waiting for the cook to do it in the
morning. You see how aggravatingly we were situated. For months we
couldn't have any company. Not a spare bed in the house; all occupied by
burglars.

“Finally, I got up a cure of my own. The expert answered the call, and
ran another ground wire to the stable, and established a switch there,
so that the coachman could put on and take off the alarm. That worked
first rate, and a season of peace ensued, during which we got to
inviting company once more and enjoying life.

“But by and by the irrepressible alarm invented a new kink. One winter's
night we were flung out of bed by the sudden music of that awful gong,
and when we hobbled to the annunciator, turned up the gas, and saw the
word 'Nursery' exposed, Mrs. McWilliams fainted dead away, and I came
precious near doing the same thing myself. I seized my shotgun, and
stood timing the coachman whilst that appalling buzzing went on. I knew
that his gong had flung him out, too, and that he would be along with
his gun as soon as he could jump into his clothes. When I judged that
the time was ripe, I crept to the room next the nursery, glanced through
the window, and saw the dim outline of the coachman in the yard below,
standing at present-arms and waiting for a chance. Then I hopped into
the nursery and fired, and in the same instant the coachman fired at the
red flash of my gun. Both of us were successful; I crippled a nurse, and
he shot off all my back hair. We turned up the gas, and telephoned for
a surgeon. There was not a sign of a burglar, and no window had been
raised. One glass was absent, but that was where the coachman's charge
had come through. Here was a fine mystery--a burglar alarm 'going off'
at midnight of its own accord, and not a burglar in the neighborhood!

“The expert answered the usual call, and explained that it was a 'False
alarm.' Said it was easily fixed. So he overhauled the nursery window,
charged a remunerative figure for it, and departed.

“What we suffered from false alarms for the next three years no
stylographic pen can describe. During the next three months I always
flew with my gun to the room indicated, and the coachman always sallied
forth with his battery to support me. But there was never anything to
shoot at--windows all tight and secure. We always sent down for the
expert next day, and he fixed those particular windows so they would
keep quiet a week or so, and always remembered to send us a bill about
like this:

          Wire ............................$2.15
          Nipple...........................  .75
          Two hours’ labor ................ 1.50
          Wax..............................  .47
          Tape.............................  .34
          Screws...........................  .15
          Recharging battery ..............  .98
          Three hours’ labor .............. 2.25
          String...........................  .02
          Lard ............................  .66
          Pond's Extract .................. 1.25
          Springs at 50.................... 2.00
          Railroad fares................... 7.25
                                             ———
                                           19.77

“At length a perfectly natural thing came about--after we had answered
three or four hundred false alarms--to wit, we stopped answering them.
Yes, I simply rose up calmly, when slammed across the house by
the alarm, calmly inspected the annunciator, took note of the room
indicated; and then calmly disconnected that room from the alarm, and
went back to bed as if nothing had happened. Moreover, I left that room
off permanently, and did not send for the expert. Well, it goes without
saying that in the course of time all the rooms were taken off, and the
entire machine was out of service.

“It was at this unprotected time that the heaviest calamity of all
happened. The burglars walked in one night and carried off the burglar
alarm! yes, sir, every hide and hair of it: ripped it out, tooth and
nail; springs, bells, gongs, battery, and all; they took a hundred and
fifty miles of copper wire; they just cleaned her out, bag and baggage,
and never left us a vestige of her to swear at--swear by, I mean.

“We had a time of it to get her back; but we accomplished it finally,
for money. The alarm firm said that what we needed now was to have her
put in right--with their new patent springs in the windows to make false
alarms impossible, and their new patent clock attached to take off and
put on the alarm morning and night without human assistance. That seemed
a good scheme. They promised to have the whole thing finished in ten
days. They began work, and we left for the summer. They worked a couple
of days; then they left for the summer. After which the burglars moved
in, and began their summer vacation. When we returned in the fall, the
house was as empty as a beer closet in premises where painters have been
at work. We refurnished, and then sent down to hurry up the expert. He
came up and finished the job, and said: 'Now this clock is set to put on
the alarm every night at 10, and take it off every morning at 5:45.
All you've got to do is to wind her up every week, and then leave her
alone--she will take care of the alarm herself.'

“After that we had a most tranquil season during three months. The bill
was prodigious, of course, and I had said I would not pay it until the
new machinery had proved itself to be flawless. The time stipulated was
three months. So I paid the bill, and the very next day the alarm went
to buzzing like ten thousand bee swarms at ten o'clock in the morning.
I turned the hands around twelve hours, according to instructions, and
this took off the alarm; but there was another hitch at night, and I had
to set her ahead twelve hours once more to get her to put the alarm on
again. That sort of nonsense went on a week or two, then the expert came
up and put in a new clock. He came up every three months during the next
three years, and put in a new clock. But it was always a failure. His
clocks all had the same perverse defect: they would put the alarm on in
the daytime, and they would not put it on at night; and if you forced
it on yourself, they would take it off again the minute your back was
turned.

“Now there is the history of that burglar alarm--everything just as
it happened; nothing extenuated, and naught set down in malice. Yes,
sir,--and when I had slept nine years with burglars, and maintained an
expensive burglar alarm the whole time, for their protection, not mine,
and at my sole cost--for not a d---d cent could I ever get THEM to
contribute--I just said to Mrs. McWilliams that I had had enough of that
kind of pie; so with her full consent I took the whole thing out and
traded it off for a dog, and shot the dog. I don't know what you think
about it, Mr. Twain; but I think those things are made solely in the
interest of the burglars. Yes, sir, a burglar alarm combines in its
person all that is objectionable about a fire, a riot, and a harem, and
at the same time had none of the compensating advantages, of one sort or
another, that customarily belong with that combination. Good-by: I get
off here.”






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIOUS STRANGER, AND OTHER STORIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The carnal god
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The carnal god

Author: John R. Speer
        Carlisle Schnitzer

Illustrator: Margaret Brundage
        H. S. De Lay

Release date: August 3, 2025 [eBook #76623]

Language: English

Original publication: Indianapolis, IN: Popular Fiction Publishing Company, 1937

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CARNAL GOD ***





                            The Carnal God

                By JOHN R. SPEER and CARLISLE SCHNITZER

          _A strange and thrilling story about a golden image
          that was instinct with evil life, and the terrible
         weird fire that burned with the cold of outer space._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                        Weird Tales June 1937.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


                        _1. The Dreadful Face_

On starless nights when the moon was obscured by the earth's shadow,
Pierre Soret walked alone down the darkest and most deserted streets in
London. He did this to avoid the people who might look into his face.
His face! He shuddered, his pinched shoulders wrenching sharply with
a bitter shrug. Could anyone call this mask, this unearthly mass of
bubbling flesh, boiling and seething in his own blood, a face?

Pierre knew what always happened when people looked into his
torture-shattered eyes. The sight of their horror sickened him. His
memory ached with the sharpness of pain he had felt on those few
occasions when some luckless persons had inadvertently seen, and
halted, frozen momentarily with the intense horror and nausea that
overwhelmed them, their faces graven with revulsion; a moment later to
totter rapidly past him down the street, the tension of their feeling
released with an effort that ended in a sob of hysteria and fear.

The route Pierre took upon these nights was always the same. With
his long black opera cape and moth-eaten topper, he stalked through
the streets like some villain from an old Drury Lane melodrama. "A
quaint old man who has refused to leave his yesterdays," people might
remark, if they did not see his face. Pierre gave no heed to the few
people he passed, except to draw the cape quickly about his face if
they approached him too near under the eery, fog-filtered glare of the
street lamps.

At Nigh Street, Pierre's bent figure paused wearily before he started
up the hill. A few yards from the corner, he paused again, staring
at the yellow lines of light cutting the fog and issuing from the
slit-like windows of the beautiful home of the Countess Donella
Moonard. In the thick mists, the house, impressively large and of
Egyptian architecture, resembled a temple of Black Magic veiled in
oppressive incense. The yellow slits glowered steadily and ominously.
What brilliance and exotic color lay within!

It was late, but not all of the Countess Moonard's guests had departed.
This would be the first party of the new season; trust her to make it
gay and unusual.

Pierre walked slowly forward, muttering to himself. His shoulders
brushed the low, ivy-covered wall surrounding the estate. He was
nearing the entrance to the garden. Above the gate in the wall, an
ancient gas torch flickered, casting a ghastly light that might have
come from the most ancient tombs along the Blue Nile.

"The fools!" he mumbled bitterly. "If I could only tell them what she
really is!"

Within a few feet of the entrance, he paused again, resentfully.
Was it his fault that the curse of many years before had made him
an outcast from the very society that now applauded the brilliant
Countess Moonard? He thrust back his cape. How good this musty dampness
felt! For weeks he had not been outside his home. His lungs cried
out in rebellion, cried greedily for deeper and deeper drafts of the
refreshing breath of night. The Countess Moonard! His hatred flamed
higher. Her guests ... fools! What would happen if he were to walk into
that gay party scene, drop his cape from about his face, and tell them
that----

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly he paused; the pale, frightened face of a beautiful girl was
confronting him in the dim flare of the gas torch. It was too late to
draw the folds of his cape about his face. The girl had already seen
the sickening sight, and a stifled cry rose from her lovely throat.

"Oh, Carl!" she stammered weakly, clutching the shoulder of the tall,
handsome young man who stood beside her.

"Ruth! Dearest--what----?" The young man was puzzled until he saw
Pierre's face.

Usually when Pierre saw that he had frightened someone with the sight
of his horrible features, he turned and ran away, rather than suffer
the indignity of an apology--but something about this girl made him
linger. It was a small diamond-studded pendant that hung from about
her slim white throat. In that, Pierre saw the unmistakable sign of
death and despair that always cast its shadow upon the throats of the
Countess Moonard's victims. The girl was marked!

From the girl's face, Pierre turned to the young man. He looked into
his eyes and saw there the familiar terror that always spread across
the faces of those who looked upon him.

A long moment of silence passed. The girl turned from him, covering
her face with her hands and clinging tightly to the young man, who now
stared at Pierre with growing inquisitiveness.

"I'm sorry," Pierre finally said.

The young man tried to look pleasant. He was an intelligent young
doctor, and although the sight of Pierre had upset him, he was quickly
regaining his poise.

"Sorry? What for?" he asked.

"My face, if it frightened you. It usually does." Pierre tried to smile.

"Oh, yes, of course!" Carl spoke with more assurance now. The girl on
his arm was still trembling. Neither Carl nor the girl wore wraps; they
had been wandering through the gardens of the Countess Moonard's estate
in preference to dancing.

"Ruth, dearest, don't allow this to affect you." He patted her shoulder
gently. "I say, old man, you gave her an awful fright. I don't wish to
be unkind, but you really are enough to frighten anyone."

Curiosity was fast overcoming Doctor Carl Fielding's fear. He looked
closer into Pierre's face.

"Are those boils or burns--or what? How long have you been afflicted
this way?"

"Ten years."

"Indeed? It is rather difficult to see here in this poor light, but
something should be done about your face. As a plastic surgeon, I would
recommend that you----"

"Permit an operation?" Pierre interrupted. "Young man, modern surgery
cannot do anything for my case."

"I disagree with you. Surely you would be willing to give me a chance?
This must be horrible, going about frightening people. Or do you enjoy
nearly scaring young women to death? My fiancée is still trembling!"

Carl removed a handkerchief from his pocket. "Here, Ruth, stop crying,
and use this. The boogy man isn't going to get you. What am I going to
marry anyway, a cry-baby?"

"I'm not crying!" she protested indignantly. "It was just the sudden
shock of--well, you and I walking along, and then suddenly to----"

She turned to Pierre, but did not look directly into his face.

"Really I am sorry if I offended you."

"Oh, no, no; it is I who should apologize." Pierre's voice trembled
with gratitude. "You are very kind--both of you. I was quite careless
tonight. Usually I am more thoughtful of people. You see it is not
pleasant to----"

He was looking at her throat. If this young man would listen! But
no, it was impossible. No one would believe the story of the diamond
pendant.

Pierre said stiffly: "I really thank you for your kindness, and I am
sorry if I have spoiled your evening. Good night!"

He turned and started to hurry away.

"Oh, but wait a minute," Carl called to him. "I really meant what I
said about your face. I think I can do something for you. Won't you
take my card and call at my office? At least you can tell me what
caused this awful affliction."

Pierre quietly accepted the card that was handed to him. He thrust it
quickly into the pocket of his vest. Doctor Fielding noticed that the
man's hands were as hideous as his face.

"You think you would like to know what afflicted me?" Pierre said with
a trace of bitterness. "I wonder if you would believe me if I told you."

"I would have to," Carl answered.

Pierre waited a moment before he said abruptly: "I see you have been to
the Countess Moonard's party. Do you know her well?"

"As well as most people know the mysterious Countess Donella Moonard,"
Carl laughed. "Does anyone really know her? Surely you are not
acquainted with the Countess?"

Pierre did not answer his question, but said directly: "Young man, I
will accept the invitation to call at your office. I never go about in
the daylight, but if you would be there sometime in the----"

"Make it tomorrow evening. I'll be there until midnight," Carl said
quickly.

"Very well, but I do not come because I think that you can do anything
for me."

He looked at Ruth again. Self-consciously she put her hands to her
throat.

Pierre added significantly: "Perhaps I may be able to help _you_. If
there are no stars or moonlight, I will call on you."

"I don't understand. What does the absence of stars and moonlight have
to do with your calling on me?"

"I will explain that later. If I may offer a word of advice to the
young lady, I am sure I might save both of you from----" Pierre
faltered. So much to explain, so much that was unexplainable! How
could he hope that these two young people would believe him?

"You were about to say----?" Ruth looked interested.

"You have made a foolish bargain with someone. The price you will pay
is too high. But it grows late, and I am sure there is little I can say
to you just now. Perhaps I have said too much already. Until we meet
again, I bid you good evening!" Pierre removed his hat, and bowed in a
low sweeping movement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ruth could not restrain her gasp of horror as she saw the man's head.
It was scarred and smelled strongly of burning hair. He had forgotten
that he should not remove his hat. Mumbling an embarrassed apology,
Pierre hurried into the darkness beyond the gate.

"Carl, did you see his hair? The man looked as if he had been horribly
burned!" Ruth cried when he was gone.

"The most awful-looking man I have ever seen. All your fault too; you
would insist on walking in the night air. Why did we have to walk all
the way around the garden? The Countess' parties always do this to you,
Ruth. They give you the craziest ideas."

"Then you do remember what she prophesied tonight!" Ruth exclaimed.
"Really, isn't it uncanny? Tonight the Countess told me that I would
take a new step in my life; something would happen that would change
everything for me. She said it would begin with a horrible fright. And
I was frightened, Carl. Do you suppose----"

"Suppose nothing!" Carl replied with some exasperation. "The Countess
and her fake prophecies are without weight to me. You women are always
falling for the ways of some old crone with a crystal or a deck of
cards in her hand. Besides, she may have planted that old man in our
path tonight just to make her claims more convincing. How do we know
but that all of that horrible appearance was not just so much clever
make-up?"

"I know it wasn't."

"How do you know?"

"I just do, Carl." She smiled at him. "I believe everything the
Countess has told me. But, come, dearest, we must be returning to the
party."

She took his hand, and turned back to the garden. Carl followed
reluctantly.

"Ruth, I wish you would give up your devotion to the Countess and her
mad religion, or whatever it is. I don't like it. You've changed since
you have taken her so seriously. First thing I know you'll be a convert
to her--oh, what do you call it--moon worship?"

She stopped and turned to him; her voice was strange and final in its
tone. "Carl, I am already a convert. The religion of Moonere has given
me everything I want in life. Soon I will take the sacred vows of its
followers."

"You can't. I won't have it, I tell you. Oh, Ruth, surely you can't
believe in this preposterous, this unnatural faith? I don't know what
hellish power the Countess may have over you; but I do know that it
isn't natural for a normal girl, reared as you have been, suddenly to
accept a faith that even a heathen would sneer at! And I'm going to----"

Carl was interrupted by the unheralded appearance of one of the
Countess Moonard's swarthy-skinned Egyptian servants. The man, tall and
sinisterly handsome, was dressed like all the Countess' menials; he
wore the brief, exotic attire of a slave in an ancient court or temple.
The servant bowed his head and made a peculiar sign which Ruth seemed
to understand.

"The Countess desires to see you, most lovely maiden of the Temple of
Moonere," the servant said solemnly.

"Maiden of the temple of Moonere!" Carl could not restrain his disgust.
"You tell your mistress I am taking Ruth home; and that if she wants to
see anyone about her insane religion, she may consult me."

The servant did not answer him, but his eyes narrowed into slits of
cruelty and hatred. His lips curled contemptuously.

"Nilathar, I will follow you to the priestess," Ruth said, ignoring
Carl's threat to take her home.

"Ruth!" Carl pulled her to his side. "I'm not going to let you stay
here alone. You've got to listen to me."

The servant broke Carl's grasp about Ruth's wrist, and pushed him from
her.

"No one is to restrain a maiden of the temple when the priestess
calls," he said, standing between Ruth and Carl.

"Why, you----" Carl lunged at the Egyptian, who quickly drew a knife.
The blade pressed against Carl's vest, and seemed only too eager to
press further. The servant smiled in mock courtesy.

"The guests are departing. The Countess sends you her regrets, for she
is retiring with her faithful maidens," the servant said coldly. "Your
coat and hat will be brought to you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carl was furious, but a length of glittering steel in obviously adept
and determined hands is a deterrent to the most courageous, and will
instill restraint and judgment in the most foolhardy. What perplexed
Carl also left him with a feeling of helplessness--Ruth's apparent
lack of consideration of his danger. This was not like the girl he had
known since his early childhood; the girl who would have fought like
a tigress anyone who might have threatened Carl. Now she ignored him
entirely, as if it meant nothing to her that his encounter with the
servant might have proved fatal for him. He turned to make one final
plea to Ruth. She was gone.

When his coat and hat were brought to him, he took them and said
with an ironic smile, "Tell the Countess I am overwhelmed with her
hospitality. She must call on me some day."

Beneath the surface of Carl's polite departure swirled an undercurrent
of bewildered resentment. There was nothing natural about Ruth's
acceptance of the faith of Moonerism, whatever that was. Carl's
thoughts of the entire evening moved rapidly back to the hideous old
man they had met at the garden entrance; he recalled his words of
advice to Ruth: "You have made a foolish bargain with someone. The
price you will pay is too high."

That old man must have sensed Ruth's intention to follow this strange
religion; he knew more about the Countess Moonard than he pretended.
But what? Nothing about the entire evening made sense. Ruth had become
a stranger to him, a beautiful stranger. The characterization seemed
significant, though in what way he could not fathom. Ruth had always
been an attractive girl, but recently he had found her beauty violently
compelling. And tonight, the strange new depths of her beauty had
made him marvel; it was a beauty of coldness and austerity, and it
frightened him. Ruth, the Ruth he knew, was and must be beautiful, but
never cold, never cruelly elusive.

Something was happening to Ruth, something that was taking her away
from him. And that was not permissible. Carl Fielding did not allow
what he loved and wanted to be taken away from him. The Countess had
something to do with it, and he would fight her; but he must learn
something about her, the strange power she exercised over Ruth and the
other converts.

Carl settled restlessly back into the interior of his car, musing
over the strange events of the evening. Who might know anything about
the Countess Moonard, other than her converts, whose lips were always
sealed with secrecy?

Although it was a slim hope, there was his old friend, Inspector
Chadwick of Scotland Yard. Perhaps the eccentric detective would be
able to assist him.


                      _2. A Weird Disappearance_

Early the next day, Inspector Chadwick looked up from his desk to
behold the troubled features of Doctor Carl Fielding. Carl had not
slept the night before, and his worry showed plainly on his face.
Chadwick leaned back in his swivel-chair, and greeted him in a tone of
mock seriousness.

"So you've come to confess? Well, turn over the jewels, and I'll see
that they make it easy for you. I'll recommend hanging at the earliest
possible date. How are you, Doc? Haven't seen you since last spring.
Been intending to get around to your office for a little chat. Heard
you were engaged to be married. And from the looks of that long face
of yours, you must already be hitched. Sit down, put your feet on the
desk, smoke my cigars, and I'll even go so far as to offer you a good
drink of brandy just to show you my heart's in the right place."

This was Chadwick's manner of treating everyone. He ran a continuous
flow of conversation, annoying his subject with the enforced silence;
but from this silence Chadwick often learned more than if he had
permitted him to talk. Inspector Chadwick could see that Carl had not
come to him for just a friendly visit.

Carl sat down heavily, and looked at the smiling, round face of his
friend. He scarcely heard any of Chadwick's rattling greeting.

"I thought I would--er----" Carl started to break into the Inspector's
incessant flow of chatter.

"Ask me to lend you five pounds?" Chadwick went right on talking.
"There was a man in here the other day, had one glass eye, and one good
eye. He offered to give me either one as security for a slight loan.
You look like a sick canary. What have you been doing to yourself? I
always said doctors were poor advertisements for their remedies. Try
this brandy; it might put a little color into your face. Good idea
there! I'll play doctor, and you be the inspector for a while. If this
Crayton case keeps up any longer, I'm going to be a first-class medico
anyway. You know, it's one of those very technical points; all about
this and that. Practically have to understand medicine to get any sense
out of the thing. Should be right up your alley. How do you like my
American speech? Notice I talk more like an American than I do a loyal
subject of the king? Need that effect. Been working on terms, tones,
pronunciations. Oh, so much to change! How about having dinner with me?"

"See here, Chadwick, will you be quiet for a minute, and let me talk?"
Carl finally blurted out.

Chadwick threw back his head and laughed, a hearty laugh that shook
his broad shoulders and made his face redder than it already was. "Oh,
so you want to talk? Well, well, fancy that! All right, Doc; you talk,
and I'll listen. But if it's about me being best man at your wedding,
that's off. I don't look right in formal dress. When is the wedding, by
the way?"

"Unless I get some help, there may not be any wedding." Carl looked
soberly at him.

"Help?" Chadwick laughed again. "What do you want me to do, persuade
the girl to marry you? I thought you had already proposed."

"Chadwick, did you ever hear of a religious cult known as Moonerism?"
Carl ignored his friend's attempt at humor.

Chadwick became serious almost immediately.

"The Countess Donella Moonard?" he asked.

"Yes. Ruth, the girl I'm going to marry, has suddenly been seized with
a desire to become one of her followers. Chadwick, there's something
uncanny about the Countess and her religion. You probably know more
about her activities than anyone else in London. So I----"

"I'm afraid I know very little." Chadwick rose from his chair, and
walked restlessly about the office. The religion of Moonerism had
been brought to the attention of Scotland Yard once before; however,
investigation of the Countess Moonard had only revealed that she
believed in a religion having to do with certain astral and planetary
bodies. Those who gave themselves up to its teachings never revealed
the secrets; and those who tried to learn more were either converted or
by some strange manner suddenly and for ever frightened from attempting
to obtain further knowledge.

"Surely there is something we could do about it." Carl began walking
back and forth with his friend. "You know how I feel about Ruth's
acceptance of such a strange faith. Besides, Chadwick, I have reason to
believe that--well----"

The words stuck in his throat. He could not bring himself to believe
that the Countess or anyone else really had supernatural powers;
furthermore what he was beginning to suspect was beyond belief.

"Doc, there's really nothing we can do about this, except to try and
persuade your fiancée to use better judgment. There are many strange
religious cults in London. As long as they do not break any of our
laws, we cannot stop them. No one has ever found out enough about
the Countess and her beliefs to justify a thorough investigation.
Her following is comparatively small, mostly beautiful women--very
beautiful women."

"That's just it," Carl said excitedly. "All of them are beautiful and
young in appearance. The Countess herself--she must be seventy if she's
a day, but look at her. Her face is ageless. Chadwick, you know that
I would be the last person in the world to waste time over foolish
beliefs in the supernatural; yet--well, I've noticed that Ruth has
become--different. I see it in her face, in her actions, in----"

"Of course you do. All those religions require a certain amount of
fanatical devotion. Ruth is young and impressionable. Perhaps if you
took her away for a while?"

"But that's just it! She seems to move as if controlled by another
mind. Last night I was almost stabbed trying to keep her from staying
with the Countess, and the affair left her entirely unimpressed with my
danger."

"Stabbed?"

"Yes, by one of the Countess' servants. Look, Chadwick, you are clever
at obtaining secrets. Why can't you work on this, and really find out
what happens to those who take up Moonerism?"

"I know what happens. They follow it to their death. Apparently they
lead normal lives outside of their activities within the temple. What
can Scotland Yard do about that? Today people have a right to worship
as they please, you know."

"Oh, you don't grasp what I mean. I think there is something beyond
the ordinary enchantment of a strange religious faith. Call it what
you will, the Countess Donella Moonard has a power over the few people
she contacts; and that power is transforming Ruth from a lovely girl
into----" Carl shuddered.

"Come, come, Doc. You're allowing this too much importance. I will
admit the acceptance of the religion is bad enough; but after all, I
know of at least fifty prominent women, in good society, who believe in
Moonerism. They are not faring so badly."

       *       *       *       *       *

The telephone on Inspector Chadwick's desk began ringing impatiently.
He picked up the phone.

"This is Inspector Chadwick." He smiled at Carl. "You say you want to
speak to Doctor Fielding? Why, of course. He's right here in my office."

"No one knew I was here. Who----" Carl took the phone with an
expression of puzzled fear. "Ruth! Yes, dearest. At once. Of course.
Please try to control yourself. I'll be there as quickly as I can."

He banged the receiver down, and turned to Chadwick. "Ruth calling me.
She's talking strangely. Said someone put your phone number in her
mind. She wants me at once. Come with me, Chadwick. Something's wrong."

"I'm on my way now!" Chadwick followed Carl out of the office.

Reaching Ruth's apartment in record time, Carl was startled by the look
of fear in her eyes. She looked as if she had just been awakened from a
horrible nightmare, as she stood before him in her negligee; her light
brown hair, usually so well-brushed and sleek, was now a wild mass of
disorder.

"Oh, Carl! Carl! What has happened to me? Where have I been?" She ran
to his arms.

"Why, Ruth, don't you remember? I left you last night at the Countess
Moonard's. You insisted upon staying."

"Yes, yes, I remember that. Then I went to sleep. The Countess said----"

Her eyes closed. She seemed about to faint.

"She said what?" Carl took her shoulders between his hands and shook
her anxiously. "Ruth, what did she say?"

Ruth's eyes opened. The fear came into them again, and she began crying
hysterically. "Oh, it can't be! Carl, I'm lost! Lost!" she sobbed.

"Ruth, you must get a grip on yourself and tell us what happened."

Carl led her to a chair, into which she dropped, limp and helpless.
Suddenly she started talking again, her eyes staring widely.

"I don't know. I don't remember what happened after I fell asleep at
the Countess'. I should remember. I want to remember what she said
to me, and I'm afraid now. I awoke here in my room. I heard a voice
calling to me. There was no one here, no one with a voice like the one
that was calling me. It's calling now! It's warning me, Carl, warning
me not to go on. Listen! I can hear it so plainly. It's a voice--a
voice like that old man's. The old man with the horrible face, and
eyes, and--oh, Carl, Carl, what did I do? Now there are two voices. The
Countess is telling me to come back--to sleep, to sleep. And that old
man is saying: 'Don't listen to her; listen to me. I am your master.
Moonere will take your soul to a hell beyond hell!'"

Her voice broke with uncontrollable sobbing. She began babbling
insanely.

"There's nothing I can do for her now, except to quiet her," Carl said
finally. "She needs sleep. A sedative, and perhaps we can get her mind
back to normal."

Under Carl's care, Ruth was soon asleep; although her body convulsed
with sudden spasms of fear that came even through her slumber, as if
she were defending herself from unseen demons who were dragging her
away. Gently closing the door of her bedroom, he returned to talk with
Chadwick.

While Carl had been inducing her to sleep, Chadwick had discovered a
small necklace upon the carpet. It looked as if it had been torn from
someone's throat with great violence.

"Ever see this before?" Chadwick held the glittering pendant out to
Carl.

"Why, yes. Ruth was wearing it last night. It is something new she
picked up."

"No, nothing new about this." Chadwick shook his head. "This is the
symbol of Moonerism. I've seen them before. Never this close, however.
Notice the pendant?"

For the first time, Carl observed the pendant closely. It was oval,
about two inches and a half long, about an inch and a half wide, and
apparently of some onyx-like substance. It glowed with an unearthly,
blue-black light, faint but perceptible. At the upper side, and a
little to the right, a small glittering stone was set; a stone that
glowed as if it were imbued with some cruel, radiant life. From this
stone, a thin line of light traced downward to the lower center of the
oval, where another and larger stone was set. When the thin line of
light reached this second sphere, it grew brighter and engulfed it in a
consuming glow.

"Feel this thing," Chadwick said, handing it to Carl.

"Why, it's cold as ice!" Carl gasped.

"Wonder what that design means?" Chadwick took the necklace back again.
"You know, Doc, it looks to me as if the Countess Moonard is going to
be thoroughly investigated this time. As soon as Ruth awakens, we must
try to get more information from her. No doubt she was hypnotized. But
this old man she speaks of----"

"I know who she means. I'll tell you about him; but first, I want to
take another look at her. I think I had better get a nurse, and----"

Carl was moving to the bedroom as he spoke. When he opened the door, he
let out a cry: "She's gone!"

"What!" Inspector Chadwick made his way to the door in two leaps.

A hasty search of the room and the adjoining bath revealed nothing. The
open window with the curtains blowing lazily was their only clue.

"Kidnapped!" whistled Chadwick. "Now this _is_ a case for Scotland
Yard. Come on; we're going to pay a visit to the Countess."

They were hurrying for the door when the telephone in the hallway began
ringing.

"Answer it." Chadwick turned upon his heels. "May be important."

The voice Carl heard over the telephone made his face suddenly pale.
It was the voice of Pierre Soret, saying: "Doctor Fielding, you must
trust the fate of your fiancée to me. She is being taken back to the
Temple of Moonere, but do not permit any rash blunders by the police to
interfere. Her life will pay the penalty. I am your friend. Wait until
tonight, and I will come to your office, if the stars permit."


                       _3. The Cult of Moonere_

Doctor Fielding looked from his watch to the window of his office,
opening upon a black velvet night. He had encountered considerable
difficulty in restraining Inspector Chadwick from going at once to the
Countess Moonard's home in search of Ruth. Now he was further annoyed
by the torture of doubt. Had he been foolish in obeying the voice--the
voice of an old man he had seen only once before? Perhaps the telephone
call had only been a trick to delay the rescue of Ruth. That could be,
for it was very late, and there was no sign of the old man, although
the sky was without a twinkle of starlight.

The telephone on his desk disturbed his thoughts with its jangling
ring. He answered impatiently; it would be Inspector Chadwick calling
again to find out if the mysterious old man had made his appearance.

"I think I should take a look around the Countess' home," Chadwick was
insisting.

"No! We've gone this far; we must hold out. There's someone at the door
now. It's surely he. I'll call you when he's gone," Carl shouted into
the telephone, crashed the receiver on the hook, and ran to the door.

It was only the charwoman, armed with buckets and mops for her nightly
duties.

"Sorry, doctor," she said, pushing a stray wisp of grimy hair from her
eyes, "but I thought if ye didn't mind, I would be cleanin' yer office.
But then if I'll bother ye----"

"Yes, you will," Carl answered hastily. "Forget about my office for
this one night. I am expecting a caller." He took some loose coins from
his pocket and gave them to her. "Here, take these and buy yourself a
midnight snack."

"Ah, thank ye, sir, and God bless ye, sir, and----"

Carl had to push her gently but firmly out of the door to shut off the
flood of almost tearful gratitude the old woman was heaping upon him.

He closed the door, and turned again to search the sky for any trace of
unwelcome stars when a scream echoed down the corridor of the offices.
Throwing open the door, he saw the old man standing in the corridor,
his black cape covering his face. The charwoman was hastening down the
stairs, gesticulating and screaming with fright.

"She saw my face," the man in black said simply.

Carl ushered him into his office, and quickly locked the door. Pierre
now kept his cape wrapped about his face as he looked suspiciously
about the office.

"Are we alone?" he asked.

"Yes. I've been waiting all evening for you. Now please tell me about
Ruth. Is she all right? Oh, what does it all mean anyway?"

Carl hurried him to a chair in front of his desk, and then seated
himself. Pierre sat down, but still remained covered.

"Doctor Fielding, I am glad that you trusted my telephone call this
afternoon," Pierre began to speak. "When I told you last night that
I would come to see you, it was because I wanted to help you. Your
fiancée was in danger. I saw the sign of Moonere upon her throat."

"You mean this?" Carl displayed the necklace Chadwick had found that
afternoon.

"Yes, that is the mark of the Countess Moonard--the beginning of what
will eventually become this!" Pierre stood up, throwing the cape from
his face.

For a moment Carl's senses reeled. He gripped the edge of his desk,
and leaned unsteadily against the back of his chair. He felt the blood
drain from his head; he had not felt this way since his first days in
the dissecting-room at the medical school. His horror shamed him. After
all, he was a doctor who was supposed to be able to stand the ghastly
sight of blood and injury. But this was different! What he saw in
Pierre's face was beyond ordinary gore!

The face seemed to be afire. It looked like flesh that was slowly being
cooked. The eyes bulged and smoke seemed to swirl from them. And above
it all there was the horrible stench of charred human skin.

For a long moment Pierre said nothing. Carl could not speak, although
he fought bravely to gain control of his feelings.

"Not a very encouraging sight, is it, doctor?" Pierre broke the awful
silence.

"I--I can't believe it. It's not possible--it--in God's name, man, what
caused this?" Carl finally gasped.

"Moonere!" Pierre's pained eyes looked into Carl's.

"Moonere?"

"Perhaps you know her better by the name of the Countess Donella
Moonard. The beautiful Countess Moonard and Moonere, the sorceress,
daughter of the God of Sudre, are one. Your fiancée is marked for the
sacrifice that for the last ten thousand years has offered up its
beautiful captives to the greedy God of Sudre!"

"Sudre? Where is Sudre?" Carl stared at him incredulously.

"Sudre is another world, another planet, with another scheme of
life--a scheme of life more complex than any dream of our existence,
more terrible than all the horrors of history, beyond comprehension
by any of our sciences or philosophies. It is all we are, refined and
horribly exaggerated in some phases, until our most potent symbols of
evil are only weak caricatures beside it. It is evil transcendent and
all-powerful. It is the natural, purged of any goodness, and become
supernatural and transcendent. A few men of ancient Egypt knew of its
existence, knew of the All-Powerful One of Sudre, who has been playing
his evil jest upon the helpless people of this earth for countless
centuries."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carl could only stare at Pierre, trying to realize meaning from the
strange sounds he made. It was as if he listened to a man from another
world.

"You do not understand, I know." Pierre sat down again, wearily. "But I
will make you understand, if you will only hear me out. You must try to
grasp what I tell you."

Pleadingly Pierre's scarred hand reached across the desk and touched
Carl's fingers. Hastily Pierre withdrew his hand as he saw the look of
revulsion upon Carl's face. Carl felt himself sicken at the feeling of
unearthly coldness of the man's skin. The feeling of coldness was not
in keeping with the appearance. To look at him was to think of fire,
all-consuming fire!

"The way my hand felt to you just then is the way my skin is all over
my body," Pierre said. "Touch it, if you dare. You are a doctor.
Examine me. These sores that look like boils and fire--feel them, and
you will know the cold sensation of a billion miles of space."

Carl's hand moved slowly to Pierre's face. With dread reluctance, his
fingertips traced over the pitted, irregular features. It was like
feeling an iced corpse, only worse, for this flesh was alive. When he
withdrew his hand, he beheld a trace of damp, bluish substance upon his
fingers.

Pierre spoke again: "Last night when I told you of the stars, you
wondered what they had to do with my going out. Now you see my hopeless
state; you see the unspeakable ugliness of my face. You must believe
that all of this is a part of the curse the stars have in store for
those who defy Moonere. When the moon and the stars loom so brightly in
the evening sky, my flesh boils; my blood steams and courses through
my veins, sending poison, poison from Sudre--moon-poisoning throughout
my body. It is not the heated fire of the sun or of a furnace, but a
cold, blue fire that chills as it burns, yet burns more intensely than
a thousand blasts from hell.

"I am slowly being destroyed, because I have defied Moonere and sought
to drive her from the earth. Do you know what it is to be destroyed,
to be conscious every minute of your slow journey to death? Look! I'll
show you a picture." Pierre took from his pocket a small photograph.

Carl looked from the photo to the man who stood before him. There was
no resemblance. The picture was of an intelligent man in his late
thirties. He was tall and straight, with a splendid, manly physique,
and handsome face that was crowned with heavy black hair, graying at
the temples.

"That is a picture of Professor Pierre Soret." Pierre stood up,
pointing to the picture in Carl's hand. "You see the man was tall, a
large man, an athlete in his college days. Now look at him!" He made a
disdainful gesture to his present slight figure that was scarcely five
feet in height. "I am the same man of that photograph taken over ten
years ago. But there is no way I could prove it, because I am slowly
being burned to a stony cinder."

"I can't believe it," Carl cried out against the madness of his
thoughts. "How can you expect me to believe that this woman has been
able to destroy you like this? What fiendish power, even of the
supernatural, could do this to a man?"

"The crystal of Sudre in Moonere's temple. Like the light-collecting
principle of our modern telescopes and reflectors, it draws together
the beams of Sudre into one hellish and destructive fire.

"Sudre is a world, a satellite of the outermost planet of our solar
system. Astronomers have not discovered this moon, Sudre, for it is
not of sufficient size or density to enter into their calculations;
and its discovery would disclose none of its power of evil, even if it
were charted. Nor do they realize that upon it burns a fire that is
controlled by the evil magic of the God of Sudre. Upon certain nights
of the month, when it is on the side of that outer planet which is
facing earth, the power of that fiery creation is directed upon me.
Even when it is on the other side of that planet--and it revolves
about it once every twenty-seven of our days--those rays come down
to earth with sufficient power to keep me living in the painful
realization of my certain death.

"And there is life there; a life of eternal evil, like nothing science
has ever yet discovered or ever will discover--life that would strike
horror in the strongest hearts of the most coldly impersonal scientific
explorer. The life of the undead, of which you have heard in your tales
of earth horror, is nothing compared with its evilness."

       *       *       *       *       *

The old man's voice droned on. "I will not dwell upon a description of
them, for it is this threat to your own fiancée's life that prompts
me to even mention this to you. This evil beyond hell, which is the
Countess Moonard's power--the crystal of Sudre----"

He broke off a short moment, then resumed: "You have seen the sun's
powerful rays burning paper under a magnifying lens? Upon almost the
same principle, yet using the crystal of Sudre instead of glass,
Moonere burns her lovely offerings upon the altar of the God of Sudre.
Few men are ever sacrificed to Sudre; it is almost always women, for
the God of Sudre is a carnal fiend, delighting in despoiling chastity
and ravishing virginity.

"Each convert to Moonerism is given a super-thrill in the discovery
of how beautiful she can become. Ah, that is the way Moonere first
enslaves her victims. They come to her seeking beauty. She promises
them eternal loveliness, beyond even their dreams; and when they do as
she decrees, they always receive this precious desire of every woman.
That is why no one ever reveals the secret of Moonere. They do not
dare, for she not only holds their lives in her hands, once they come
to her, but she also holds woman's most priceless treasure--beauty.
Every year, lovely women sink into the depths of despair and torture
because they seek the unnatural grant of beauty from the God of Sudre."

Carl cried out, suddenly remembering: "You're right! That was the way
Ruth was trapped, I'm sure. I have seen the change in her."

"True, young man, although your fiancée is not yet fully enslaved.
Tomorrow night, the full force of the rays of destruction from Sudre
will fall upon earth. Moonere will hold her rites to the God of Sudre.
Once the girl has danced within the temple of the maidens of Moonere,
there will be no salvation for her. To leave Moonere, or to defy her,
would mean the doom you now see in my face."

"But how were you trapped?" Carl asked.

"I will tell you of that. You see the secret of Moonere has never
been new to me. From my earliest youth I knew that my life was to be
dedicated to the destruction of Moonere and the evil reign of the God
of Sudre; just as my ancestors have fought and died in silence for this
curse. In my family, throughout the centuries, the knowledge of Sudre
and Moonere has existed. We dared not reveal it; and even if we had
done so, none would have believed us. Yet all of it is true.

"From ancient cities, long since buried beneath the sands of the
deserts, to modern London, Moonere has slipped inconspicuously through
life, carrying the curse of the God of Sudre, while my family has
silently borne the banner of humanity. Although I am only a few years
past forty, my knowledge of science and the ancient arts is far
advanced. Were it not for the fact that I have the jealously guarded
secrets of all these generations behind me, I could never have attained
the ability I now have.

"That ability will explain your fiancée's strange actions in the
earlier part of the day. I have taken over her mind. Telepathy is one
power that Moonere and I both have in common. She thinks that is the
only weapon I have, but she is wrong. At last I have discovered a more
powerful ray than the one that burns in the glass of Sudre. With it, I
hope to destroy Moonere and free the world of the constant threat of
her accursed power."

"But what will become of Ruth?" Carl asked anxiously.

"I may be able to save her, if you help me. Today Moonere knew that I
had taken Ruth's mind from her powerful grasp. It was I who awakened
her from the sleep Moonere sent her to last night. It was I who kept
warning her to beware."

"Yes, I know. That was what frightened her--the sound of your voice."

"Of course, and she called for you. I gave her the telephone number
of your friend. But when you arrived, you gave her a sedative, thus
undoing much of my good work."

"But how did you know what I gave her? You were not there."

"I saw everything nevertheless. I will tell you how later. I saw the
Countess' servants kidnap your fiancée while she slept. I saw them take
her to the temple where she will be forcibly detained until the night
of the sacrifice."

"And that will be----"

"Tomorrow night. The rays will be at their maximum intensity. If
everything goes right, and it is the will of God that I defeat this
devil-daughter from another world, your fiancée will be returned to
you, unharmed; the many tortured souls who now follow Moonere will
be freed; and the world will be rid of at least one black scourge of
unholiness. The work of my family will be finished."

"But you still haven't told me why you were burned by the crystal,"
Carl interrupted.

"So I haven't. And you need that to convince you further that I am
not a madman spinning lies to lure you into lunacy, eh? Well, it
was through my desire to test my ray with which I hope to destroy
Moonere. That was ten years ago, shortly after the death of my father.
I was so sure that with this ray nothing could prevent my success in
exterminating Moonere that I went to her home. I knew just where to
find the secret entrance that leads to the temple of the maidens. No
one else could have found it. The home of the Countess Moonard was
built sixty years ago; and in all of London, neither you nor Scotland
Yard combined could find a trace of the architects who constructed it.
It is so ingeniously arranged to mislead a curious snooper that one
could spend the rest of his life wandering from one false corridor
into another, never getting anywhere. No, only I could find the secret
entrance that leads to the temple with its star-glass in the roof. The
plan of the house is the same as was her first temple many centuries
ago."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You mean the Countess is immortal?"

"Of course; that is, the lifetime of Moonere does not correspond with
any human conception of a life-span. Moonere, or the Countess Moonard,
as she has been known here in London, is from another planet, and has
lived on this earth, serving the God of Sudre, for many ages. As long
as she serves faithfully, she will live at his will. If she never
offends her fiendish deity, she will live eternally. Even in my family,
where the knowledge of her has existed for many centuries, there is no
record of her beginning. You will find that hard to believe, because
such things are beyond the comprehension of men. It will always be so
with the mysteries of this world. Only a few learn the solemn secrets,
and they find their knowledge a curse, their lips forever sealed by
man's eternal skepticism.

"But as I started to tell you, when Moonere and I finally clashed,
my ray proved a failure--a fault I have corrected. I was seized and
dragged down into the center of the temple. My clothes were torn from
me, and I was thrown upon the altar. The crystal burned; the poison
crept into my body. I thought that my time had arrived, that this would
mean death. But that was not her plan. I was exposed only for a few
brief moments, much the same as the convert who takes the final vows.
Then I was released. Mind you, I was set free. I could go to the police
and Scotland Yard if I wanted to. I could tell them my story."

"Why didn't you?"

"Do you think they would believe such a story? Furthermore, even if I
took them to the temple, to the very altar, what could I prove? Upon
the surface, Moonere has nothing that would arouse any suspicion beyond
ordinary curiosity."

"But your face--you were horribly disfigured after the exposure to the
glass, were you not?"

"No. That is not the way the glass first interprets the ray of Sudre.
Those exposed to it for only a brief moment upon the altar, find that
their youth, their physical charm, is doubly enhanced. When I was
thrown from the temple, I looked years younger; my hair, which was
turning gray before I entered, became black and glossy again. I could
not look into a mirror without realizing the wonderful appearance
that had been given to me. But it was only temporary. That is the way
Moonere holds her victims for ever, sealing their lips, and bending
them to unending servitude. The beauty does not last. Only by constant
bathing in the rays beneath the glass can one keep fresh. Deny yourself
those rays and the aid of Moonere, and you find your entire body slowly
being destroyed. One look into the mirror, by a victim so denied, is
enough to enslave the soul with fear.

"Any night when the heavens are filled with the diffused rays of its
many bodies, and Sudre is between earth and the planet about which it
revolves, the torture of slowly being burned to a cinder increases
for me. That is why I remain inside my home, which I have succeeded
in partially insulating from them. That is why I can walk about in
the fresh air upon only those all too few dark nights. In my home, I
work with my inventions, the findings of many years of research by
my family. But each night, Moonere and the Thing of Sudre send their
rays to me. It is their jest, a further extension of their joy in
the torture of mere mortals. My body now has an attraction for those
rays. Even behind the closed, insulated walls, I feel their burn. With
my present ray-machine, I have been combating them. Every night, if
you could only see with your normal eyes the battle of Moonere's ray
of death and my own discovered ray, you would know what a strange,
unbelievable life I lead."

Carl looked wan and weary. Just now it seemed to him that there was
nothing real about anything. The man who stood before him with his
horrible face, his story of Moonere--everything was like a mad plot and
setting for a dream of horror. All he could do was trust and pray that,
through this man who knew the secrets, Ruth would be saved from a life
far worse than death.

"All this is so strange, so far removed from reality," Carl said.
"There is nothing I can do but follow your directions. I will do
anything to save Ruth from this life."

"Then you must come with me." Pierre stood up and threw his cape
about his face. "I will take you to my home. There are many things I
must teach you before tomorrow night, the night of the sacrifice. I
will have great need of your assistance in my laboratory. You will be
protected with everything my knowledge can give you. Perhaps I should
warn you that I believe tomorrow night Moonere will seek to destroy me
entirely. If you are with me, you may suffer a similar fate. Shall we
go?"

"We go!" Carl rose to his feet, and hurriedly put on his coat and hat.

Once outside, under the low-hanging canopy of the black night's sky,
Pierre breathed heavily, as if the murky air of night was doubly
precious to him.

"Young man, you are about to witness what no one outside my own family
has ever seen. You will see the work of many past generations, and you
will see strange inventions that are of the future. Science has been
very slow in its progress, compared with what my family has achieved."
Pierre laughed, a rather cracked and squeaky laugh, somewhat disturbing
to Carl; it was the first time he had heard the man laugh. "Indeed,
my boy, if you live through this, you will never forget it; yet you
will never be able to tell another soul. Imagine it! How little the
people on this world really know of what is going on about them! Here
is busy, foggy, magnificent, dingy, dirty London with her many souls
living their frustrated daily lives, their noses to the ground; and
every night a drama they can never see is played up there in the sky.
In their very midst two houses hold the powers and the secrets of ages
beyond recall!"


                      _4. The Scene in the Bowl_

Pierre's home was a decaying old town house of red brick, with bleak
shuttered windows and a gray slate roof. Conservative and ancient, it
stood like an unfriendly hermit, far back from the street.

Carl was impressed with the solid, substantial appearance of the old
house. At one end of it, the north wing, was a glass-enclosed room,
beginning at the second story and ending slightly above the regular
roof-line of the building. The front door was of fortified steel. To
the dull surface of the door was secured a substantial bronze tablet,
covered with a rich patina of long exposure, on which were inscribed
the words:

    BRING NOT YOUR TALES OF THE WORLD
    YOU KNOW, FOR BEHIND THIS DOOR
    LIES A WORLD YOU WILL NEVER ENTER.

"A most hospitable door," Carl said.

"Yes, a door without a latch-key," Pierre replied.

"Then how do you open it?"

His question was answered with the silent movement of the steel door,
as if someone had opened it from the inside; although in the dim light
of the reception hall, Carl could see no sign of another occupant.

"It opens by cutting off the beam of light that passes from the post
at one side of the door to the post on the other," Pierre said, as he
ushered Carl into the hallway.

Carl turned and watched the door close silently behind him.

"You have them in some of your modern office buildings," Pierre
continued. "This door has opened that way for the past forty years. My
father developed the principle. Come, we will go to my observatory."

Pierre led Carl to a narrow stairway leading upward to the north
wing. Up one flight they moved silently. A dim blue light illuminated
the landing, and shed its ghostly rays down another hall. Up another
flight, leading in the same general direction, they walked. Carl felt
as if he were climbing slowly through a mad dream.

Passing through a heavy, rivet-studded door, they entered the
laboratory. The room was vast, covering the entire top floor of the
house. The glass enclosure which he had seen from outside served only
one end and corner of this amazing room. The walls were of a peculiar
gray, glowing softly as if phosphorescent. Throughout the entire
expanse of the room there was arranged an incalculable assortment
of instruments, switch-boards, control-panels, glass and polished
chromium, copper and brass. To Carl it was like suddenly entering a
room fitted with all the strange instruments of the alchemists, and yet
it was like looking ahead, fifty, a hundred or even two hundred years
into the future.

Pierre led the astounded Carl over beneath the glass dome. Here seemed
to be the major control position for all the complex horde of machines
that filled the room. In the center of this circular space stood a
small insulated platform. Upon it, supported by gleaming glass rods,
stood a huge, hollow hemisphere, from which emanated an eery blue
light. Coming closer and looking downward into it, Carl was thrilled to
see moving objects, familiar outlines of buildings he knew belonged to
that part of London called Piccadilly Circus.

"This will explain the question you asked me earlier in the evening.
The inventors of modern television would be envious if they knew of
this creation. I need no transmitting station to bring into my home any
scene I may desire."

Pierre quickly removed his cape, and began tinkering with an assortment
of strange knobs upon a large panel back of the bowl. The Piccadilly
Circus scene disappeared, and into its place came a picture of Ruth's
deserted apartment.

Again Pierre turned the knobs, and the scene in the bowl became a
moving panorama of London streets. Swiftly they passed, until the
estate of the Countess Moonard appeared in the strange vessel.

"It is astounding. How--how----?" Carl gasped.

"To explain its operation would take all of our time, my boy. I have
many other things to show you, the work of my ancestors and myself.
This magnetic bowl has been most helpful. Through it I have been able
to follow the unholy activities of the Countess Moonard. That night
after I left you, I hurried back here and drew the light-rays of the
Countess Moonard's home into the bowl. I saw her anointing your fiancée
with the oils in preparation for the sacrifice to come; saw her filling
the mind of the girl with the evil suggestions of the God of Sudre.
When Ruth was sent back to her apartment, still in the trance of
Moonerism, I then took over her mind. I had to be cautious, as I did
not want her to confuse my suggestions with the thoughts of Moonere.
When you found Ruth this morning, the Countess and I were both battling
for control of the girl's mind."

"Can you see where they have Ruth?" Carl asked anxiously.

"Certainly!" Pierre turned the knobs again.

       *       *       *       *       *

The little dials that traced the locations he wanted shivered onto the
desired points, and Carl beheld a thrilling sight. In the bowl there
was appearing a picture that resembled nothing of modern London. He saw
a temple of ancient Egypt. The towering pillars along the side of the
temple were adorned with strange hieroglyphics of forgotten beliefs.
The vision moved slowly, like a motion-picture camera shot traveling
to a close-up scene that ended at an altar where a mysterious fire was
burning. The picture remained steady for only a moment, then moved
on to a room filled with many pillows. Upon a richly draped couch,
Carl saw his fiancée lying as if in deep slumber. Negro slaves were
anointing her slim, white body with precious oils. The chamber of a
princess in some forgotten age this could have been--but the girl was
Ruth!

"What are they doing to her?" Carl cried out, his fingers reaching into
the bowl as if he hoped to pluck her from the couch.

"They are making ready for the night of the sacrifice. Every woman who
takes the vows of Moonere relinquishes her charms to the God of Sudre."

"You mean----?" Carl's fists tightened.

"It is the price each one pays for her beauty. Poor deluded fools!
They come to the Countess, seeking beauty and charm with which to win
and hold the man they love; instead, they give up their most priceless
virtue. The God of Sudre takes their charms onto himself."

"How? You say this God is not of this world?" Carl asked.

"Look!" Pierre changed the scene in the globe.

Slowly the picture moved down the magnificent room. It approached a
bronze platform, and paused. There upon the bronze dais, standing
erect, was the golden image of a man, or demigod. The image was about
seven feet tall. The details were perfectly wrought, and every muscle
and fiber of that magnificent nude statue was the embodiment of the
perfect development of masculinity. Yet it was a sensual development,
eliminating all that might be good, and emphasizing all that is base
and carnal. The face was cruel beyond any conception of men. The
features were sharply brutal. Silent and motionless it stood, but the
eyes were alive; and from them burned a dull, blue-black light that
chilled Carl's blood as he watched.

"That is the image of the God of Sudre," explained Pierre. "Tonight,
when the rays from Sudre become most intense, Sudre's spirit will
enter it, and it will become imbued with life, the evil life of Sudre.
Tonight it will indulge in an orgy of lust at which even the most
dissolute of ancient Romans would have shuddered. Your bride-to-be is
to give herself for ever to Sudre, and for ever she will be lost to
you. No mortal man will ever possess her."

"No! No!" Carl cried out in tortured frustration.

"You will see on the night of the sacrifice," Pierre said calmly.

"But what are you going to do to save her? You haven't told me yet how
this monster can be stopped."

"Everything I have and know, I will use. If I fail"--Pierre's shoulders
shrugged--"there is no one to carry out my work. If I win, Moonere will
be destroyed; the tortured souls, who have given all for beauty, will
at last be free. We have only a few hours more. As we have talked, this
night has passed. Another day is upon us; with its end comes the night
when the evil rays will be fully focussed. Moonere will again send the
hellish light that I have fought. Tonight I will use everything to
combat her--telepathy, advanced knowledge of science, and secrets that
will die with me."

"But what shall I be doing?"

"You will be helping me. Within these all too short hours, you will be
learning the operation of the many machines. Follow me."

Pierre led him to another corner of the room, where an instrument, not
unlike a telescope, was placed. He handed Carl a pair of glasses with
very thick, colored lenses.

"Look through these. Look into the instrument, and tell me what you
see."

"It looks like a beam of light, but it seems to stop in the sky; it is
like a highway of white marble that ends abruptly," Carl said.

"You see the ray from the fire on Sudre, traveling at a faster speed
than light, bringing with it the secret of beauty and death that only
the star-glass of Moonere can transmute to potency. Now watch this!"

Pierre moved to a high stand that supported a cone-shaped searchlight
reflector. He made several deft adjustments, and then pushed in a
switch on the long panel that ran the length of the room. Carl, with
the aid of the glasses, could see a light-beam shoot into the heavens
and travel in the direction of the beam that seemed suspended in the
sky.

"This is my latest invention. Everything depends upon it. Tonight you
will see a spectacular sight. Everything we do will be controlled from
here. You and I, working with science, destroying that which is beyond
this planet."

Carl looked about him. He reached out his hand and touched a metal
laboratory bench; its solidity reassured his slipping sense of the
reality of it all. Dazed, he wandered again to the bowl. What he saw
made him start as if he had been shot with electricity. Inspector
Chadwick was struggling with two brawny servants in the temple.

"It's Chadwick!" Carl cried. "They've captured him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Pierre hurried to the glass.

"The fool!" he rasped. "Why did he go there? I thought you had warned
that detective friend of yours to keep out of this. Now they will make
him a prisoner. They may not wait until tonight for the sacrifice to
destroy him."

"Is there anything we can do?"

"Nothing, unless they hold him for the dance of the maidens in the
temple. One thing certain, he will be burned as I was, or even
destroyed upon the altar. Watch closely, and you will see why no one
has ever betrayed the secret of Moonere."

Breathlessly Carl watched them drag Chadwick into a small throneroom
where the Countess Moonard, clothed in the robes of an ancient
priestess, sat in serene majesty.

They threw him down in front of the throne. He rose and shook his fist
threateningly at the Countess. She smiled; her long, deeply beautiful
eyes looked into his face. His trembling arms stopped shaking and
dropped limply to his side. He stood in hypnotized rigidity. She
pointed to a door that slowly opened. Chadwick walked meekly through
it. The slaves bowed before the Countess and followed him through the
door.

[Illustration: "They threw him down in front of the throne."]

"He's going into the dungeon. They are saving him for a later
sacrifice," Pierre said, almost relieved. "That means we have time; we
may save him."

"Chadwick wouldn't have gone to the Countess' unless he suspected
something more than he let me know. He must have been well protected.
He's no fool. A man can't just disappear--not an Inspector from
Scotland Yard. Chadwick would have his men following him. They will get
him out of that dungeon," Carl spoke with growing determination.

"You are mistaken." Pierre turned the knobs again.

The bowl showed Chadwick's men rushing into the reception hall of the
Countess' home. Twisting the knob again, the bowl revealed the Countess
smiling innocently. A servant brought in three of Chadwick's men. They
began talking angrily to the Countess. Then the door where Chadwick had
gone down into the dungeon opened. He came out, and began talking to
his men.

"They're leaving!" Carl cried.

"Yes, he has instructed them to go. He has told them there is nothing
wrong. Your friend's mind no longer belongs to him; his every thought,
his words are the words and thoughts of Moonere. She has told him to
send the men away, assuring them that nothing is wrong. You see they
are gone. And now Chadwick returns to the dungeon."

"Why can't you take over his mind as you did Ruth's? You said you could
do it. Why can't you free him from Moonere's grasp?"

"I can," Pierre answered calmly, "but to do that would place your
fiancée in danger. Every minute I have concentrated upon her. Within
her mind is the continual conflict of two powers struggling for
supremacy. For the present, it is best that I whisper, 'Peace and
quiet,' to the girl. You see how she slumbers, so still and unmoving;
that aids my plan.

"When the time comes for the sacrifice, they will discover that their
lovely maiden is not to join their dance of passion."

Pierre began laughing at the thoughts that were damning Carl.

"You need not fear, my friend; she will sleep, sleep; and nothing
Moonere can do will make her gratify the desires of the evil God of
Sudre. Tonight you will see a disappointed God!"


                         _5. The Golden Image_

Throughout the hours, Carl crammed the many secrets of Pierre Soret's
strange machines. It seemed to him that he had forced the learning of
all the world into his brain.

Midnight found him staring with weary eyes into the sky. The night
was clear; and above the dimly haze-rimmed horizon Carl could see the
metallic glitter of the stars. Looking through the telescope with his
specially designed glasses, he found the light-beam again. This time it
hovered very closely to the center of the heavens.

Pierre moved from one machine to another, tightening little
adjustments, testing each minute detail.

When the beam reached its zenith, he said: "Now we will see the
beginning of war."

In the globe, Carl could see the temple. The fire upon the altar was
blazing brightly. Along the walls sat many slaves, playing strange
musical instruments. The light in the temple was blue, the silvery,
all-pervading blue of moonlight.

"Tonight they will begin the dance of invitation to the God of Sudre."
Pierre peered over Carl's shoulder into the bowl. "Before his golden
image, they will perform the subtle dance of seduction, inviting him to
come and take them in his arms, and embrace them. You see the beam of
light. From Sudre it has traveled the miles of space, and hurried with
its concentrated rays into the star-glass. See how the flames upon the
altar blaze tonight. The dance begins with Moonere's entrance. She will
give her signal. Watch!"

The Countess Moonard entered the temple from a small door at one
end, walked slowly through the throng, each worshipper bowing as she
passed, and came before the image of Sudre. Standing there, she was
both terrifying and beautiful. Her body became slowly rigid. She flung
back her head, and her long, black hair fell down behind her. Her
body glowed with sensuous intensity. She raised her arms slowly, in
supplication and desire, and then let them fall to her side.

The musicians increased the tempo of their playing. Onto the floor of
the temple came the dancing forms of many beautiful women, clad only in
their long hair that waved like misty light about their supple bodies.
Arms outstretched, they danced rhythmically before the idol. In the
pale blue light of the temple, their forms were like white marble
statues suddenly breathing life. Around and around before the God they
danced, their passionate movements growing more and more intense.

Carl watched, revolted and yet fascinated by the obscene gyrations
of these beautiful nude dancers who threw their charms in rhythmic
supplication toward the golden image.

Shadows darted about the temple walls, shadows of arms raised high
and lowered quickly across sculptured white curves, shadows of bodies
thrusting and withdrawing with compelling seductiveness. Beautiful
faces, swelling breasts, and eyes that cried for love--the love of an
inhuman idol of gold!

"It's moving!" Pierre cried. "The God of Sudre returns."

Carl could not speak; he could only stare into the glowing sphere.
The golden image was moving! Slowly the sinewy muscles of its arms
moved downward; strong golden fingers felt along its thighs; its chest
expanded as it drew in the scented breath of the temple. Carl saw the
arm of the God reach down and bring up a lovely white form. He saw her
swoon with pleasure in the embrace of this golden image that now lived.
He saw the God release the white form of the girl, saw her fair body
writhe with tormented desire, her hands clutching eagerly for him. On
he walked to the throne beside the altar. As he walked, the maidens
bent down before him, their lips caressed his feet, slender fingers
sought to touch him as he moved majestically above that sea of adoring
flesh. Moonere bowed before him. He touched her shoulder, and raised
her up to meet his lips in the lingering kiss. Then he sat down upon
the scarlet throne.

Food and wine were brought to him by the maidens, each seeking to
outdo the others in her attentions. They fairly groveled at his throne.

"Now they will bring him the new sacrifice," Pierre said tensely. "I
will let her walk slowly so that Moonere will fail to see that my mind
controls her. But he will never possess her!"

"Oh, God, I pray not!" cried Carl.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ruth entered the temple, her eyes staring glassily in front of her.
From her shoulders trailed a flimsy white cloth, her slender form
gleaming through it in the pale blue light. Two of the maidens led her
to the Golden God. In torment, Carl watched him feast his eyes upon
Ruth's beauty. Unable to stand the sight, Carl turned from the globe.

He looked beseechingly to Pierre. The man's lips moved in formless
speech. Pierre was talking to Ruth, he knew. He looked again to see
if it had worked. Carl gasped as he saw Ruth fall in a crumpled faint
before the throne. Moonere rushed to her. The maidens began laboring
over Ruth's lifeless form. The Golden Image frowned. Carl watched the
look of surprize fade from Moonere's face; slowly, gradually it became
a smiling mask of cruelty. Pierre was now laughing.

"Ah, they do not enjoy that! Moonere is puzzled. Moonere and the Golden
God of Sudre are disappointed for once!" his voice rasped. He shook his
fist into the globe. "Now what will you do, Moonere? What will you do
to me?"

As Pierre spoke, Carl saw Moonere dart to the altar and pull quickly
upon some heavy chains that hung in front of the blazing fire. Slowly
a shining disk of platinum appeared. Moonere swung it rapidly until it
caught the light of the hellish fire that burned upon the altar. Its
glistening surface began to glow. Suddenly a blinding flash of light
engulfed the globe before the two figures concentrated in front of it.
Pierre's vast room filled with a strange purple and blue-green light.

"Quick! Turn on the ray-machine!" Pierre cried, pushing Carl out of his
way as he hurried to the panel. "Your glasses, don't forget them. Don't
forget to turn Z-4. And when I tell you, let me have R-9." Pierre was
shouting now.

All through the room the strange light shattered into millions of
little stars. The ray from Pierre's machine shot upward through the
sky. Carl saw it cross the ray that was coming from Sudre. The sky in
the vicinity of the rays, that could only be seen through Pierre's
glasses, was filled with a mighty conflict of fire.

"More phosphorous liquid. Hurry! Hurry!" Pierre was almost screaming
now. Carl pulled the lever, and the liquid poured into a tank beside
the ray-machine. He worked feverishly, following Pierre's orders.
Everything he had previously rehearsed, he now performed rapidly and
automatically. He turned knobs, pulled switches, poured mysterious
liquids into tanks, watched a pageantry of light and small sparkling
stars leap about the room, dancing from corner to corner.

The room grew hotter. Perspiration dripped from Carl's face as he
struggled to follow the orders issued by Pierre. Although he knew what
to do when Pierre commanded, he did not know what each separate action
meant. It was enough that he could recognize the orders and could do
what must have been the simplest of things in this maze of wizardry and
science Pierre had developed.

As Carl worked over a boiling vat that contained a thick mixture of
evil-smelling chemicals, he felt a severe burning sensation at the back
of his neck. Turning his head slightly, he saw two yellow flames shoot
toward him from the switch-board panel.

"Take that other tube and place it in the switch-box. Tube X! Tube X!"
Pierre's tone was frantic.

Carl whirled around in his excitement, and as he did so, a bottle fell
with an explosive crash. Smoke and fire leaped up from the floor.
Pierre quenched it quickly with an extinguisher. The heat of the room
was beginning to show upon Carl, and he sensed that in a moment he
would pass into unconsciousness.

The tube placed in the box as Pierre had directed, Carl staggered
blindly back to his duties between the tank and the switch-board panel.

"Something's wrong! Something's wrong!" he heard Pierre say in a
croaking voice. The fear that gripped him made it impossible for Carl
to ask what was wrong.

Pierre turned from the ray-machine. Carl saw him, and for the moment
went insane! Pierre's face was gone! There was only a blue light
shining from the open gap that had once been the face of Pierre Soret.
Somewhere in that horrible sight were two white pin-points that
retained a semblance of the man's eyes. Bluish smoke was issuing from
his entire body.

"We must work fast; perhaps you can finish what I have started,"
Pierre's broken voice came from the awful vision that represented him.
"My ray-machine is not powerful enough; I cannot concentrate the rays
on the temple with sufficient intensity to effect my purpose. You must
take my concentration mirror, which is similar to the one you saw
Moonere use. I must release your fiancée from my mind. You must submit
yourself to me. I will send you to the temple, if I last that long.
Your fiancée will be at their mercy until you arrive."

Sensing the danger, Carl hurried to the globe. Ruth was stretched upon
a couch in front of the throne. The maidens were working desperately
to revive her, while the Golden Image of Sudre glowered down upon her.
Carl realized that once Pierre released his grip upon her mind, Moonere
would send her into the greedy clutches of Sudre. Ruth would be lost to
him.

"No! I can't permit it. You must save her!" he cried. "But how? Man,
you are gone! You do not live, you can't exist as you are! In heaven's
name, how could you hope to save anyone, how can you even speak? How?
How?"

"This is the only way. Do not doubt me. The rays are destroying me.
Everything is going fast. You must go, and I will direct you," Pierre
said sternly.

Already Carl could feel the electric touch of Pierre's intellect
usurping his. Even his voice sounded weak as he cried out: "No! Save
Ruth! Save Ruth! Keep her asleep. Keep her--aslee----"

The blue fire that was Pierre became larger; nothing but blue, blue
light filled his eyes; and Pierre, the mind of the great but tortured
scientist, filled Carl's brain.

"You will take your car and speed to the Countess Moonard's. Make all
haste. Nothing can stop you. You _must_ get there!" Carl heard Pierre's
voice as a whisper.

At first he moved stiffly, as if each step needed the command of the
man who now controlled his brain. Gradually the feeling decreased. Carl
Fielding became Pierre Soret!

Into Carl's pocket Pierre thrust a round, silver disk.

       *       *       *       *       *

Through the streets that led to the Countess Moonard's star-haunted
residence, Carl's roadster sped like a silver bullet upon an errand of
mercy. Twice he would have met certain death had it not been for the
super-intellect that made quick thinking snap his movements with the
deft skill of a racing driver.

"Go faster! There is little time to lose. Go faster! Do not be afraid,"
the voice of the professor rasped. The wind whipped past Carl's face.

Carl froze as he heard the next words of the man who gripped his brain.
"Do not be afraid; nothing can harm you now, for you are not guided by
the normal destiny of a human. Something stronger leads me on, and I
in turn send you upon this errand which may mean death for you. Some
Greater Power of Good now seems to be working against the Evil Thing of
Sudre.

"I am slowly being burned to some strange form, I know not what, but my
mind is keen and clear. It is the work of destiny, the destiny of good
perhaps. You are at the command of my brain."

Carl could not stop now, and even the mighty fear that shook him hurled
him forward. On he drove, knowing that every turn he made was being
watched by Pierre in the globe--but there was nothing he could do; he
was driven by a force far stronger than himself.

"Stop at the servant's entrance," Pierre said, as Carl turned his car
into the driveway that led to the Countess' home.

Carl brought his car to a quick stop and leapt from it onto the little
walk that led to a narrow doorway in the side of the house.

"Go through that hallway. Run!" the voice commanded.

Carl followed the directions, turning and twisting through a series of
doors and porticos, opening secret panels in the walls, and hurrying
through a confusing catacomb of corridors until at last he was within
the temple where no one else had ever gone without being brought before
the Inner Circle of Sudre. Now he was there.

They were dragging Inspector Chadwick to the altar. Huge black slaves
were preparing to toss him into the flames. The pealing laughter of the
Golden Image rang through the temple. The maidens were dancing; and in
the very center of their circle was Ruth, now wild-eyed with passion,
her face livid with the same desire Carl had seen upon the faces of the
others. She was moving to the Golden Image to give herself to the God
of Sudre.

"Reach into your left pocket!"

Carl's frustration ceased as he heard Pierre snap this command. The
dancing ceased. An awed hush fell upon the scene of the orgy. A
demoniacal scream arose from a chorus of horrified throats as Carl
whipped from his pocket the silver disk. Through the glasses he was
wearing, Carl saw a reflected ray of glaring intensity flash out from
the disk.

He flashed it over the heads of the screaming dancers. Forked tongues
of fire leapt in all directions, and licked out against the naked
bodies that fled beneath its swiftly darting flames.

The Golden Image roared in anger and plunged forward to strangle
Carl. He flashed the ray across the face of the thing, and to his
astonishment, the Golden Image seemed no longer alive. It stood still
as if it had returned to its former immobile self. Then it began to
melt!

"Strike Moonere! Strike Moonere!" came Pierre's staccato command.

Carl lashed the serpentine beam full across the Countess Moonard's
face. She cursed him, and screamed a horrible oath. He lashed her
again. Retreating before the flailing whip of fire from the disk, the
Countess ran and threw herself upon the altar. The flames leapt up, as
she disappeared in a flash of blue smoke.

"My work is almost over," Carl heard the faint voice of Pierre Soret,
coming like a sigh. "Throw the disk into the flames upon the altar.
Hurry, for the altar of Sudre will soon be cool, and only the ashes of
its evil reign will smolder in remembrance of the Fire of Sudre."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carl hurled the disk into the now dwindling flames upon the altar. It
twisted and curled with the flames that wrapped about it. Finally the
flames sank and vanished, as a silvery snake-like wisp of smoke coiled
upward, and then sank gradually into obscurity.

"Now my work is finished," Carl heard Pierre's voice, this time coming
to him in the tones of whispered weariness. "Young man, do you know,
strange as all my life has been, strange as all the stories of my
family's struggle against the evil God of Sudre, I have never been
really frightened until now--now I find myself upon the brink of
another world.

"The house was burned. The flames consumed me; even as you raced to
the temple, the flames were destroying me, yet I did not die. I was so
afraid that I would die, and leave you in the temple with the evil I
knew was there; but I lived, even after I knew that everything in my
house was destroyed by fire. My inventions, my years of work--all were
destroyed.

"There is nothing but dreary coldness here; and in the darkness,
gray-lined specters hover all about me. Surely this is the realm
between the known and the unknown. It is strange to me, like a vast
sea of doubt surrounding my soul--yet in the distance I see a light, a
light of infinite brightness.

"My fear? Perhaps Sudre's evil ray has tainted my soul; and yet it
cannot be, for now, even here, I feel that same moving faith, the
magnetic power of good, drawing me on to some better destination. It
must be so. Even though I no longer live on earth, and I wander in a
land of dreadful strangeness, surely I have conquered evil.

"You are listening, my friend? You hear me speak to you from beyond the
border of this life. Shall I always do this? Will you be frightened,
young man, when you hear my voice?

"I am watching over you, guarding you from harm. Go to your sweetheart.
Lead her quickly from this temple of doom, for it is soon to fall.
Lead the ones who are returned to the reality of this earth out of the
temple of another world. Lead them into life as we knew it; at least as
_you_ knew it. Hurry! There is little time. I will guide you safely out
as I guided you into this secret domain."

Carl heard the rumble of falling stones, and saw huge cracks appear in
the scrolled walls. Picking Ruth up gently in his arms, he carried her
through the portal that would lead them to the outside. He beckoned to
the bewildered souls who had witnessed the end of their unholy service
to another god. They followed like innocent sheep. Only a few of the
black slaves and servants of Moonere remained, silent, stone-like
images that seemed no longer alive.

Like the thundering roll of a kettle-drum in some great symphony, Carl
heard the sound of the temple falling behind him. Every step of the
way that led through the intricate passages out of the Temple of Sudre
seemed to crumble as his followers fled close upon his foot-steps.

Soon they found themselves in the reception room of the Countess
Moonard; a strange company of unclad women, looking for some answer to
their question of where they had spent their lives. Slowly, gradually,
they seemed to sense that a terrible past lay behind them: something
that was to fade, even as the unnatural beauty of youth faded to
conform with their respective ages. Young faces on aged women were
growing old as they should have done long ago. With reality came their
sense of propriety, and they eagerly sought clothing with which to
cover themselves.

Pierre spoke again, commanding Carl to hurry them from the house.
Outside, in the clear light of the stars, they turned to see the home
of the Countess Moonard sink into the earth. The quick crackle of fire
popped in their ears, and the sky became illuminated with a great
conflagration.

Inspector Chadwick said little; Carl also remained silent. Tonight was
not the time to talk. Secretly Carl hoped that Chadwick would forget,
that everyone would forget the Countess Donella Moonard.

       *       *       *       *       *

London Newspapers in their morning editions carried the story of two
fires: the destruction of a three-story house, occupied by an eccentric
Professor Pierre Soret, who had presumably compounded some dreadful
chemical which had destroyed him and his house; the other, an account
of a disaster, either an explosion or fire of unknown origin, that
completely demolished the home of the Countess Donella Moonard, killing
her and her staff of servants.

Beyond this there was no thought of any connection between the two
houses so far apart from each other. Carl smiled somewhat as he read:

"Although the Countess Moonard has been known to certain London
socialites, her ancestry was never certified; nor was the claim of
Countess hers by any English right. It is generally believed that the
Countess originally came from France. She was a woman of mystery and
rare beauty; her age was unknown. She was a follower of some strange
religious belief, probably of Egyptian origin."

       *       *       *       *       *

There are women with snow-white hair and failing eyes, hobbling about
their homes; women who were once glamorous beauties, noted for their
coldness to all men, women whose beauty could have made them beloved.
Old and lonely now, they shun the world, living within their homes,
wondering when and what will be the end of their existence.

Doctor Carl Fielding has not heard the voice of Pierre Soret for
nearly a year now. Sometimes he thinks he hears the echo of that spirit
who so strangely left this life. For a while there were moments when
Carl felt an awful sense of fear, because the thoughts that were in
his brain that night were the thoughts of the man who lived within the
fire, but his wife's devotion has dispelled this gloomy fear and led
him on to hope.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CARNAL GOD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Sergeant Dick of the Royal Mounted Police
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Sergeant Dick of the Royal Mounted Police
        A thrilling story of the Canadian woods

Author: John G. Rowe

Release date: August 2, 2025 [eBook #76621]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Cupples & Leon Company, 1929

Credits: Roger Frank and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SERGEANT DICK OF THE ROYAL MOUNTED POLICE ***





SERGEANT DICK OF THE ROYAL MOUNTED POLICE

[Illustration: SERGEANT DICK TOOK IN ALL THESE PARTICULARS.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SERGEANT DICK OF THE ROYAL MOUNTED POLICE

A Thrilling Story of the Canadian Woods

By JOHN G. ROWE

AUTHOR OF “CRUSOE ISLAND,” “LIGHTSHIP PIRATES,”
“THE MYSTERY OF THE DERELICT,” ETC.

NEW YORK

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SERGEANT DICK OF THE ROYAL MOUNTED POLICE

By JOHN G. ROWE

Large 12 mo.    Illustrated.    Jacket in Full Colors.

ROWE BOOKS FOR BOYS

    CRUSOE ISLAND
    THE ISLAND TREASURE
    THE MYSTERY OF THE DERELICT
    THE SECRET OF THE MYSTERY IDOL
    THE LIGHTSHIP PIRATES

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, New York

Copyright, 1929, by

Cupples & Leon Company

Sergeant Dick of the Royal Mounted Police

Printed in U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

    I. The Hooded Rustlers
    II. Muriel Arnold
    III. The House in the Lake
    IV. Inside “Water Castle”
    V. A Running Fight
    VI. The Trapper and His Sons
    VII. Howling Wolf
    VIII. The Siege of “Water Castle”
    IX. The Ark in Danger
    X. An Unexpected Illumination
    XI. The Defense of the Ark
    XII. Saved by a Woman’s Wit
    XIII. Sergeant Dick’s Determination
    XIV. The Ambush
    XV. Lost in the Woods
    XVI. A Startling Discovery
    XVII. A Surprise, and a Rescue
    XVIII. Back at “Water Castle”
    XIX. The Second Siege of “Water Castle”
    XX. A Cooler for the Invaders
    XXI. The Dash for the Ark
    XXII. The Rout of the Besiegers
    XXIII. The Plan to Round up the White Hoods
    XXIV. In the Hands of Merciless Foes
    XXV. On the Track
    XXVI. The Threatening Letter
    XXVII. The Clew of the Lamp
    XXVIII. The Return to “Water Castle”
    XXIX. The Failure to Surprise “Water Castle”
    XXX. The End of the White Hoods, and of the Story

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SERGEANT DICK OF THE ROYAL MOUNTED POLICE




CHAPTER I--THE HOODED RUSTLERS


Sergeant John Dick, of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, was
leading his horse up a steep and rugged gorge in the great southwest
region of Canada. It was close by the United States border, and
practically in the shadow of the Rocky Mountains.

A fine, military-looking figure, Sergeant Dick cut, in his scarlet
tunic, riding-breeches, and “Stetson” or broad-brimmed, bell-crowned
hat. He carried his rifle at the trail in his left hand, and had the
bridle of his horse looped over his right arm.

The animal was limping painfully. It had got a thorn in its hoof
lower down the trail, where this was on the open prairie, and had
gone dead lame before its master discovered its injury and could
extract the thorn.

The accident was particularly annoying to Sergeant Dick, for it was
almost imperative he should be at the Paquita Island Reservation,
just over the United States border, by sundown, and the lord of day
was already well down the western sky.

A howling hurricane of wind made progress still more difficult,
blowing dead in his teeth as it was. No ordinary gusty gale was
this, but a ceaseless avalanche of wind tearing with a terrific howl
along the gorge, raging against man and beast in insensate fury.

At times Sergeant Dick would turn his back to the storm, and the
horse, with head also turned, would sidle along almost broadside to
it, the better to keep its feet and hold its own.

Man and horse were thus maneuvering one of the turns in the gorge
when, high above the howl of the hurricane, rang the sharp,
air-splitting crack of a rifle close by--just in front--and
simultaneously Sergeant Dick staggered and nearly fell, feeling a
sudden numbing, burning pain upon the right side of the head, above
his ear.

His Stetson hat, which had so long resisted the tugging of the wind,
was whirled from his head, and went rolling like a wheel, on its
brim, away down the pass before the gale.

With a thrill of anger, rather than of any bodily fear, the sergeant
promptly dived behind his horse, drawing it by the reins at the same
time fully broadside across the rocky pass.

As he did so, he beheld for the first time a startling tableau or
drama being enacted ahead, round the bend in the gorge.

The track still ascended, but the precipitous, seventy to two
hundred feet high cliffs, which shut him in and almost excluded the
westering sun, became at the scene gentle acclivities, thickly
covered with dense undergrowth and forest trees from the edge of the
road to their summits.

It was an ideal spot for an ambuscade, and such was what had taken
place. The stage-coach from Settleford, to Paquita Springs over the
border, was halted in the dim twilight of the leafy avenue, and the
driver and passengers were all lined up at one side of the road,
with their hands in the air--women as well as men--under the menace
of two _ghost-like_ bandits or “rustlers,” pointing an automatic
pistol in either hand and with rifles on backs.

Ghost-like indeed the bandits were. There was no other word for
their bizarre and spectral appearance.

There were four others, likewise attired, busy around the coach,
from which they were taking bags and boxes, and loading up a round
dozen of horses. Two of the horses had evidently been taken from the
traces of the coach, which was always drawn by four.

All six “rustlers” were clad in loose white linen frocks, which
descended to mid-thigh or even lower, and had great white peaked
hoods, like monks’ cowls, drawn completely over their heads and
faces!

Only two holes for the eyes showed in each hood; so the reader can
well imagine how weird and ghostly they looked in the twilight of
the leafy archway, in spite of the rifles slung across their backs
or the Browning automatic pistols in their hands, and the top boots
showing under the white frocks.

Sergeant Dick took in all these particulars--the whole thrilling
tableau before him--at a single glance of course. And, even as he
did so, he comprehended that it was not one of the six hooded,
ghostly figures beside the stage-coach who had shot at him and so
narrowly missed ending his career.

The marksman was clearly a seventh member of the gang--on the
look-out, and without a doubt perched upon the rocks at either hand.

Sergeant Dick swiftly removed his eyes from the tableau under the
storm-tossed trees ahead, and ran them over the two bold cliffs
forming the jaws of the pass at that end. He caught sight of a small
cloudlet of smoke, still hanging limply in the air above a ledge
just below the summit of the right-hand rock.

The rock behind the ledge acted as a wind-screen, and, although a
hurricane was shrieking overhead and sweeping the rocky pass below,
the air at the point was as still as if there were no wind at all.

Just as the Sergeant sighted the cloudlet of smoke, a jet of flame
darted from behind a boulder on the ledge, the gorge rang again to
the echoing detonation of a rifle, and he felt the noble animal
shielding him give a convulsive shudder, which told him it had been
hit.

It yet stood stockstill and upright before him, however, and so he
was satisfied that it could not have been struck in a vital spot.

Swift as the thought itself, Dick brought his own rifle to his
shoulder, and leveled it across the saddle at a white triangular tip
of cloth, showing above the boulder on the ledge, alongside the new
cloudlet of smoke. That white triangular tip he knew was the peaked
headgear of another of the dreaded White Hood Rustlers.

He got that triangular tip of white cloth dead in front of his
sights with the quickness of considerable practice and rare skill;
and simultaneously he pressed the trigger.

As the report of his rifle, blown along by the furious wind, went
echoing down the rocky pass, a white-clad, hooded form leaped up
from behind the boulder and went scuttling into a little cleft
beside the ledge, vanishing as swiftly as a rabbit diving into its
hole.

Sergeant Dick smiled a little grimly. He was used to seeing well
entrenched foes skedaddle--vacate their quarters as a little too
warm--under his straight shooting.

He knew for a certainty that his bullet had gone clean through the
white hood of the fugitive rustle-sentinel, within an inch or two of
its rascally wearer’s skull. The bullet would have bored a hole
through _that_ if only a little more than just the tip or peak of
the white hood had been showing.

It was a splendid shot, like hitting a card torn in half and stuck
on the chimney pot of a three- or four-story house.

Besides, the shot was such a swift reply to the one preceding it. No
wonder it scared its recipient from his strong position--“shook him
up some,” to use the language of the country.

The six bandits in the leafy avenue in front of Sergeant Dick had
all turned in his direction at the first shot. The four who had been
removing the loot from the coach were now making warily for
him--scattered in a line across the avenue, with rifles at the
ready, like hunters stalking game.

He turned his attention to them, wondering not a little why they did
not pour a volley into him or his breastwork of horseflesh. It was
evident they considered him their “meat”--a “dead goner” already,
and were anxious to take his horse, if not himself, alive.

A live horse is always desirable property in the Far West.

But the ghostly, white-robed and hooded ruffians speedily discovered
that they were reckoning without their host. Their attention was
somewhat distracted by the sudden appearance of the comrade they had
posted as “look-out man” upon the bluff, and
then--crack--crack--crack!

Sergeant Dick’s rifle pealed out sharply, and as many of the four
rustlers advancing upon him staggered or stumbled.

But to the police officer’s amazement, none of the three fell,
although he believed he had hit all three badly.

Recovering immediately from the effects of their hurts, the fellows
rushed forward, firing wildly and furiously at the plucky young
policeman. Then, suddenly, in a lull of the hurricane, came the
clatter of rapidly approaching hoofs _behind Sergeant Dick_, and
immediately afterwards two shrill, sharp whistles from the bluff or
cliff above him.

He caught a fleeting glimpse of the hooded sentinel within the cleft
in the rock, evidently returning to that coign of vantage, with a
view to helping to shoot him down--saw the fellow put his left hand
under his hood.

It was this man, undoubtedly, who had uttered those two warning
whistles, for he now immediately vanished again inside the cleft.
Simultaneously the four rustlers firing at Dick wheeled about, and
ran for the shelter of the woods on either hand.




CHAPTER II--MURIEL ARNOLD


With only one cartridge remaining in the magazine of his Mauser,
which he preferred and was allowed to carry instead of a Ross rifle,
Sergeant John Dick was thinking of falling back upon his revolver,
when the unexpected retreat was beaten by the rustlers.

With the rapidly approaching hoofs hardly sounding now in his ears,
with the hurricane again tearing past him, Dick turned his head. He
beheld a two-horse top-buggy whirling swiftly up the pass toward him
in the teeth of the storm.

These vehicles generally have only a single seat, capable of
accommodating two persons, however; and this one contained two young
women--mere girls, both of them, the elder not more than twenty
years of age!

Dick saw that the girls were not unaware of what was transpiring.
The one who was not driving, the younger and--even in that moment of
excitement he could not help noticing--by far the prettier, held a
rifle at the ready, with a grim, determined look upon her charming
face, while her companion was urging the horses to their fastest up
the rocky and broken incline.

“Say! Who are they? Why should we cut and run?” came a shout borne
on the wind from the direction of the four rustlers to Sergeant
Dick’s ears.

“They’re the--”

He did not catch the end of the answer from the fellow on the cliff.
The word, whatever it was, was lost on the raging wind.

But apparently it was heard by one or more of the gang in the road,
for they immediately communicated the tidings to one another, and
then shouted and waved to the pair guarding the driver and
passengers of the stage-coach.

Sergeant Dick had edged his horse partly against the angle of the
cliff. He now dived under the animal’s head and, rushing round the
rock, fired at the fleeing quartet with his revolver.

He hit one in the broad of the back, he was certain. The fellow only
stumbled, however, and, promptly recovering and wheeling about, sent
a shot back at him with lightning speed, but fortunately with
nothing like accuracy.

Then all four plunged into the thicket out of his sight, and he
could hear them trampling and bursting through the thick growth in a
line parallel with the road, bawling as they ran, and
unintelligibly, so far as he was concerned.

The pair guarding the people of the coach backed hurriedly to their
horses, what time the sergeant hurriedly slipped another clip of
five cartridges into the magazine of his rifle.

Gaining their horses’ sides, the two rustlers bounded into the
saddle, firing a couple of shots apiece from their pistols over the
heads of their late prisoners, to overawe them still. Then digging
their spurs deep into their mounts’ flanks, away into the wood on
the windward side they tore, dragging the other horses after them by
a long lariat which had been passed through all the bridles.

Seeing the pair thus making off, Sergeant Dick threw all further
prudence to the winds, and, running forward, pumped two shots with
swift accuracy into the leafy covert, even as it closed over their
retreating forms.

[Illustration: THEN DIGGING THEIR SPURS DEEP, AWAY THEY TORE.]

The shrill, almost human-like scream of a horse badly stricken came
out of the thicket. Sergeant Dick ran on along the woods, pelting
two more shots into these at random in the direction he knew the
fugitives were taking.

Then, suddenly, all became red and blurred before him. He reeled
blindly and fell upon his hands and knees, his rifle flying far out
of his hands.

He had forgotten his wound in the excitement of the fight, had been
losing blood profusely from it all the time, and the consequent
weakness came suddenly and unexpectedly upon him.

When he opened his eyes again, he looked into the most beautiful
face he believed he had ever seen--the face of the younger of the
two girls who had come, in so surprising and plucky a manner, to his
reënforcement.

He was lying on the ground, and she was kneeling beside him, binding
up the injury to his head, while some one supported his shoulders
behind. On the other side of him was kneeling the elder girl, with
her face buried in her hands, and sobbing bitterly, great salt tears
oozing through her fingers and dropping to the ground.

Around were standing the robbed passengers of the stage-coach,
rueful and vindictive-looking, none of them in their bitter
resentment against Fate taking any notice of the weeping girl.

“Thank you--thank you! You are very kind,” murmured Dick. “But--but
I’m all right now, and the rustlers--they mustn’t be allowed to get
away. My horse, quick! Men, who’ll follow me? Any of you?”

The weeping girl lifted her head with an ecstatic cry.

“He will not die--he will live? Oh, Heaven be praised! Ah, and you
have hidden the blood upon his face, Muriel! I cannot bear the sight
of blood. It--it always makes me feel sick. But, then, of course, I
am weak-minded, you know--not like other people, or like Muriel
here, who is as good as she is brave.”

“Be quiet, Jenny,” said the younger girl, flushing hotly. “It is
impossible, sergeant, for you to follow the robbers. Your horse is
lame, you sure forget.”

Sergeant Dick rose to his feet with the aid of the two men who had
been supporting his head. He saw that two horses remained in the
traces of the rifled coach.

“Lend me one of your horses, driver,” he cried. “I must follow these
ruffians without delay.”

“Sorry, sergeant, but one horse ’ud be no power o’ use in pulling
the coach from here to Paquita Springs; and, asides, you yourself be
in no fit condition I guess to go man-trailin’ arter seven rustlers
of their type. You are noo to these parts, that’s plain, or I reckon
you’d have heard of the White Hood Gang--the worstest, most desp’rit
gang this region has ever yit seen, I calculate.”

“I _have_ heard of the gang. But its notoriety would not deter me
from following it, only spur me on, if I had my strength back, and
my horse, too, were equal to the call I should have to make upon it.
Driver, you have been robbed of the gold you were carrying to the
Indian Reservation on Paquita Island?”

“Sure,” was the characteristic reply, with a doleful nod.

“Then I must let the gang go, even if I were equal to following
them, and accompany you in the coach with all speed to the
Reservation. What the result will be when the Indians learn that the
gold sent them has been stolen, I shudder to think of--judging from
the frame of mind they have been lately showing.”

“Guess they’ll go on the war-path, and jist raise Cain around here,”
growled the stage-coach driver, amid horrified ejaculations from all
the passengers.

“I know of a quicker means of reaching the Reservation than by the
stage,” said the girl Muriel, her lovely face flushing again at thus
once more attracting the attention of all. “My cousin here and I
live near by on Lake Paquita, as some of these people may know--the
coach-driver certainly does--in a house built on piles over a shoal
out in the middle of the lake. We keep a large sailing scow, which
my uncle calls his ‘Ark’; and we can convey you in it to Paquita
Island at the lower end of the lake in the shortest time possible.”

“Why--why! Your uncle has surely taken the idea of his lake-dwelling
and his scow or ‘ark’ from Fenimore Cooper’s famous novel, the
‘Deerslayer,’” gasped Sergeant Dick.

“That is so. My uncle was so charmed with the idea of the
lake-fortress in Fenimore Cooper’s tale, the ‘Deerslayer,’ that he
determined to adopt the same mode of living when he first came here.
We have the book at Water Castle, as we call our lake-home, and it
is the most-read book in our little library, I believe, except as
regards Jenny, who, just like poor, half-witted Hetty Hutter in the
novel, is always reading her Bible. Uncle Alf has said that having a
half-witted daughter like Hetty Hutter also helped to put into his
head the idea of living like ‘Floating Tom Hutter’ in ‘The
Deerslayer’; and poor Jenny herself models her life on Hetty
Hutter’s, reading the Bible regularly, and trying to do good always
in her own simple way. You will come with us in the buggy? Uncle Alf
contrived an extra seat at the back, on which we might carry extra
marketing. Our name, by the way, is Arnold.”

“Thank you. I shall be glad to avail myself of your kind offer, Miss
Arnold. Certainly I must reach the Indian Reservation before news of
the robbery of the stage, and the gold they were to receive by it,
gets to their ears.”

Sergeant Dick was helped on to the back seat of the buggy, all the
marketing being disposed under it inside a kind of locker; and then,
parting from the stage-coach people, away the two girls and he
whirled at top speed along the leafy avenue. His lame horse, of
course, he left behind, to be brought along in the rear of the
stage-coach, which would perforce proceed at a walk as far as the
next stopping-place.

At the speed it traveled, the buggy was soon out of the gorge, and
at a point where the road forked, the coach road continuing on in a
straight line, and the other--a mere grass-grown cattle track,
barely perceptible--leading away at right angles through dense
woods.

Along this second leafy avenue the two girls and the sergeant bowled
more rapidly still. They presently came out on the shores of a
lovely lake, lying placidly in the bosom of the mountains, which
dense woods covered from the water-line to their rounded summits.

“Behold our lake home--Water Castle!” cried the younger girl,
pointing out across the storm-ruffled water to a most
strange-looking structure--a house like a huge Madeira-cake standing
on innumerable legs, about a quarter of a mile from the shore.




CHAPTER III--THE HOUSE IN THE LAKE


“It is certainly a most admirable situation for safety and defensive
purposes,” said Sergeant Dick, regarding the distant lake-dwelling
with great curiosity and interest.

“You will find it even stronger than it looks,” laughed Muriel
Arnold. “My uncle has been quite ingenious, I consider, in the way
he has fortified it. He has improved on Fenimore Cooper’s idea; and
I am sure that you will say that the place is almost impregnable
when you have seen over it. We keep our horses and the buggy on that
little island you see just behind the castle.”

“Signal to mother, Muriel,” said her cousin Jenny, a little
impatiently.

They had all three alighted from the buggy. Muriel drew an automatic
pistol from her belt, and fired three shots into the air.

At the southern end of the strange dwelling out in the lake appeared
to be a kind of platform; and, quickly on the echoing reports of the
pistol shots--which would carry far in the light mountain air and
across the water at any time, but were now blown directly towards
the house by the strong wind--the figure of a woman appeared on the
platform.

She seemed to regard them through a spyglass, and remained gazing at
them a long time, so long, in fact, that Jenny Arnold asked:

“What ails mother? Surely she can see that it is you and I, Muriel,
through the field-glass. And the sergeant’s red coat ought to
reassure her. She knows the uniform of the Mounted Police.”

Muriel was waving her long white scarf vigorously to the distant
figure.

“Naturally she does not know what to make of you being in my
company,” said Sergeant Dick.

“Of course,” said Muriel, “she is concerned, and fears something
terrible must have happened to us or to my uncle and cousins.”

The figure on the platform of “Water Castle” turned and hurried to
the farther end, where she evidently stepped into a boat of some
kind, concealed by the house.

A minute later Sergeant John Dick saw a long, low craft, not unlike
the ordinary conception of Noah’s ark, slowly emerging into view
round the far side of the platform and house.

As it came round the corner of the “castle” into full view, Sergeant
Dick saw it was furnished with a short, stumpy mast, upon which a
ridiculously small leg-of-mutton sail was being hoisted by the only
apparent occupant.

Small though the sail was, it served its purpose well, and, bellying
before the wind, caused the great, clumsy-looking craft to slip with
considerable speed through the choppy little waves caused by the
moaning wind. The figure aboard ran aft, and, taking a long sweep
which was rigged astern to act as tiller and rudder combined,
brought the ark’s broad nose steadily round almost into the eye of
the wind, and headed the craft for a point close to where the two
girls and the police officer stood.

Leading the horses, Muriel made along the shore for the point the
ark was steering towards. Her cousin and Sergeant Dick followed
leisurely, the last-mentioned feeling his wound very slightly now,
to his great satisfaction and surprise.

As they went, his eye traveled up and down Muriel Arnold’s trim,
graceful figure with increasing interest and approval, and finally
rested with evident admiration upon her sunny brown hair, drawn back
in many a clustering curl and knotted so charmingly in the nape of
her lovely white neck.

Her simple blue print dress, belted at the waist with a broad
leathern cincture, supporting a pistol holster, became her well, as
did the exceedingly small and dapper Wellington boots which were
shown almost to their tops beneath the rather short dress, and the
great broad-brimmed, flapping “wide-awake” hat, set so rakishly upon
her head and ornamented with a single upright eagle’s feather.

About her shoulders and her neat little waist was wound a long
flimsy white veil or muslin wrap.

Her cousin’s costume was very much the same, save that there was no
feather in the hat, and this was not set at a rakish angle, but as
squarely as that of the inmate of an orphanage, while the print
dress was a pale, washed-out pink.

“Gee!” muttered Sergeant John Dick. “She’s almost as lovely a
creature as the novelist, Fenimore Cooper, described Judith Hutter
to be in his story, ‘The Deerslayer.’”

Of course he referred to Muriel, not to poor, uncomely, dowdyish
Jenny, whose Wellington boots were squaretoed instead of round-toed
like her cousin’s and fully twice as large in the feet.

“What a curious chain of coincidences or circumstances,” Dick went
on musing; “here we have almost exactly what the American author,
Cooper, imagined; two girls--one quite a beauty and the other
half-witted and otherwise rather poorly favored, certainly not as
pretty--living in a wonderful lake-dwelling, built to resist a
siege. I wonder what sort of a man the uncle and father of the
girls, this ‘Floating Tom Hutter,’ of real life, will be. He ought
to prove a rather interesting old fellow.”

And then, with sparkling eyes, his thoughts ran again on the girl in
front of him; and he nodded and murmured:

“Yes, she’s the sort of girl I’d like. She’s not tall, but she
strikes me as being just the right height a girl should be, and
she’s just as plump, too, as I like them. I owe them both a debt of
gratitude. It was plucky of them and no error, to come to my help as
they did, and not turn and bolt as most girls would have done.”

They reached the little spit of land for which the scow or “ark” was
making; and, while they stood waiting for it to come in, Muriel drew
Dick’s attention to the scenery around them--the lovely wooded
shores of the lake. She asked him, with enthusiastic eyes, if he had
ever seen finer views.

He had to admit that he had not.

The sun was throwing a golden, glittering track now across the
waters of the lake, which were gradually subsiding into their usual
peaceful serenity as the gale dropped to mere fitful, ragged gusts.

It was about a mile across the lake where they stood, but both
higher up and lower down, that is to northward and southward of
them, the water was much broader, then narrowed again, and curved
round prettily out of sight.

All around, the trees grew close to the water--in some places they
overhung it and dipped their branches in it--and on the farther
shore the woods, rising steeply to the crests of the low but gently
rounded hills behind, were faithfully mirrored in the stiller pools
and backwaters.

Sergeant Dick and Muriel were still pointing out the more charming
prospects to one another when the ark drew within hail, and its
occupant called out:

“What’s that policeman doing with you, Muriel--Jenny? Anything
wrong?”

“No, Aunt Kate, there’s nothing wrong,” Muriel answered, with her
hand held trumpet-wise beside her mouth. “Nothing, that is, so far
as we are concerned. But the sergeant was wounded in the head, as
you may see, in a fight with the White Hood Gang, who held up the
stage-coach in Crooked Gulch. As his horse was lamed, and he must
get to the Indian Reservation on the island at the south end of the
lake as quickly as possible, we brought him along. Jenny and I have
promised to take him to Paquita Island in the ark.”

“Oh, indeed!” her aunt responded, in a rather ungracious tone.
“Allow me to tell you, Muriel Arnold, that it is not for you, or
Jenny either, to make use of the ark without first consulting _my_
wishes, or those of your uncle and Jenny’s father. However, as you
are a police officer, sir, I don’t suppose my husband ’ill object to
the girls taking you down to the Reservation, and I’m sure I shan’t.
But you must first come to the ‘castle,’ and get your wound dressed
properly. Reckon, too, you could do with something to buck you up.”

“You had better do as mother says,” whispered Jenny, the half-witted
girl, “that is, come to the ‘castle’ first, and take something and
have your wound redressed. She doesn’t like any one not to do as she
says, and, asides, you might just as well humor her.”

Dick looked at Muriel and capitulated.

“I’m rather pressed for time,” he said, “but still, I don’t suppose
just visiting your home for a few minutes will delay me much; and I
never believe in crossing old ladies if it can be avoided--or
anybody else for that matter, I may add.”

The ark came sailing in, and softly grounded her forefoot on the
spit. As her square bow projected fully five feet over the bank,
Muriel was able to leap on board dryshod.

She swiftly cast free a wide, sliding gangway in the bow, and thrust
it out, so that, as it dropped outboard, it formed a gentle
gradient, up which her cousin at once led the two horses in the
buggy.

Behind the sliding gangway, and covered by it when it was inboard,
was another gentle, boarded slope; and the space between it and the
cabin or “house” was sufficiently long, as well as broad to
accommodate the vehicle and the two horses abreast.




CHAPTER IV--INSIDE “WATER CASTLE”


As Sergeant John Dick followed the buggy aboard the ark, a big,
powerful woman of middle-age and rather unprepossessing looks came
hurrying out of the door of the fore-cabin.

“Are you badly hurt, sergeant?” she asked, in a voice like a ship’s
siren, but not in an unkindly tone.

Dick answered in the negative, and said that he was ashamed that his
injury had even been mentioned.

Aunt Kate gave him a swift, searching glance, then, evidently
satisfied by her scrutiny, emitted a non-committal grunt and turned
to help her niece to draw the gangboard in again and hook it in
place.

Sergeant Dick would have helped them, but Muriel smilingly waved him
back, and the operation was easily and quickly performed.

Mrs. Arnold then pushed the scow off the spit with a boat hook, and,
sending her daughter to the sweep astern, turned the sail again to
the wind, and they swung round and headed for the “castle.”

As they slipped along towards it, she eagerly and curiously
questioned her niece as to what had actually transpired in Crooked
Gulch.

“This White Hood Gang of road-agents and rustlers is fast creating a
panic in these parts, sergeant,” she said, when Muriel had finished
her recital. “You may consider yourself lucky that you have come
through your meeting with ’em as well as you have. I guess you’ve
been sent down here to try and round ’em up. But are the Government
mad, to send you by yourself--to only send one man?”

“Oh, it was more with regard to the trouble with the Indians of the
Paquita Island Reservation than anything else I was sent along. But
you may take it from me, Mrs. Arnold, that this last exploit of the
gang’s will be about their last. Government is bound to send a
strong force to put ’em down after this.”

Mrs. Arnold said that the sooner that happened the better, and then
she turned to the stores in the carrier of the buggy, and was
speedily discussing with her niece what the latter and Jenny had
paid for the things--and should have paid in her estimation.

This discussion lasted until they were almost at “Water Castle,”
which Sergeant Dick surveyed, as they approached, with the greatest
interest.

A shoal existed or had been contrived at the spot, and into this
Alfred Arnold, Jenny’s father, aided by his four grown sons--all
big, powerful men like himself, as Dick was subsequently to
learn--had driven stout piles, upon which they had erected their
dwelling.

It was square in shape, and built of tree-trunks, each two feet
thick, and squared on three sides, so that they made a smooth inner
wall and rested solidly on one another without any chinks between
them.

In each of the four exterior walls were six windows, set equidistant
apart; and before the front door, which was plated with iron an inch
thick, inside and out--to make it as strong as the walls--was a
platform or verandah, seven or eight feet wide, running the whole
length of that side of the building, and covered by the projecting
roof.

The roof itself was a flattened cone, that is, with very little rise
in it, and consisted of strips of corrugated iron, bolted down
securely, to resist high winds, upon an inner roof of timber, almost
as thick as the walls.

Surmounting it was an iron stove-pipe, and a skylight was set in
each of the four gentle slopes.

All around the house were set palisades--stout trunks of trees
driven firmly into the shoal, like the piles supporting the building
itself.

These palisades completely ringed the “castle” round, and were not
more than nine inches apart anywhere, while they all stood about
three feet above the water. Consequently they formed an outer
rampart or stockade, which would prevent possible assailants in
canoes or rafts getting in under the windows.

There was a wide gateway, fastened by a strong padlock and chain, in
these palisades, just in front of the platform or landing stage, and
the space within the enclosure was large enough to admit of the ark
being kept inside.

All the piles under the edges of the house, moreover, were
strengthened, as well as made into an inner ring of defense, by
braces and cross-timbering closing up the spaces between them. Thus
a boat could not pass under the house except through another,
smaller gateway contrived in them, and also secured by a padlock.

Mrs. Arnold had, of course, on this occasion left the outer
gateway--that in the palisades--merely hooked to; and, freeing it
with a pole, she and her niece and daughter, amid Sergeant Dick’s
loudly expressed admiration, deftly maneuvered the ark within, and
ran its bow up to a short wooden ladder hanging from the verandah.

Muriel sprang nimbly up the hanging ladder on to the verandah of the
house, and the sergeant mounted quickly after her. Then Mrs. Arnold
pushed the scow backwards with so vigorous and dexterous a push with
her pole, that the stern of the craft was carried well out again
through the gateway in the palisades. She and Jenny meant to convey
the horses and buggy to the islet, and stable them there.

“I knew you would be keenly interested in our lake home,” said
Muriel, as she lifted the latch of the door of the building, and
ushered her companion into the living-room. “Now if you will sit
down in that easy chair of Uncle Alf’s, I will soon get you
something to put new life into you, and then re-dress your wound.”

“No, no, there is no need, I assure you. My hurt is so slight it
will do very well dressed as it is, until I reach the Indian
Reservation, and can have it attended to at my leisure. And as for
alcoholic refreshment I never take anything of that nature. A glass
of cold water or a cup of milk will be all sufficient, thank you. I
am really more curious to be shown over your wonderful lake-home,
than I am thirsty or exhausted.”

“Oh, I will soon gratify your curiosity then,” Muriel laughed; and,
going to a cupboard or pantry at one end of the living-room, she
reappeared promptly with a jug of milk, from which she filled a
tumbler she took off a rude dresser, standing at the back of the
apartment.

As she did so, Sergeant Dick looked around this, and saw that, with
the pantry, it took up the whole front of the house.

It showed signs, however, of being regularly divided into three
compartments, for two rods ran across the ceiling at about the same
distance from either end, and on these rods were hung thick, rather
shabby curtains, on rings.

Right round the three outer walls of the room ran a “bank,” almost
as high as the sills of the windows--that is breast high.

“You are wondering what that high bank all around is for?” asked the
girl, as he drank off the glass of milk, and just as if she had read
his thoughts. “That is to form an additional breastwork against shot
penetrating, in case of a siege. We keep it filled, you will see, if
you peep in, chiefly with firewood for the stove.”

Dick looked the astonishment he felt; and Muriel now led him through
a door, which stood between two others.

“The other two doors,” she said, “lead into bedrooms. This door, as
you see, leads into a central passage or hall, from which all the
other rooms open. You will notice it is lighted by a skylight. It is
here that we women would be placed in case of a siege so as to be
out of danger--I don’t think,” she added, laughingly.

John Dick saw that there were no less than six doors around him,
including the one he had just come through.

“This is--” Muriel was beginning, advancing to the first door on her
right, when there dully resounded in their ears two gunshots in
rapid succession, evidently fired some distance away. The shots were
followed after a momentary pause by two more.

Muriel started violently, and gasped hoarsely:

“_There is something wrong!_ That’s our danger-signal--four shots
fired like that!”

She wheeled and darted back into the living-room, followed by the
sergeant.

They flew to the nearest window, which was open to admit the air,
and looked out.

The ark, which could not possibly have had time to get to the islet,
was only a short distance from the “castle.” Mrs. Arnold stood in
the stern with a rifle in her hands.

She saw their faces at the window, and immediately stabbed her
finger excitedly towards the southern end of the lake, and bawled
with all the strength of her lungs:

“Your uncle and the lads--chased--_chased by Indians_!”

With a half-stifled ejaculation, Sergeant Dick flung open the front
door beside him, and sprang out on to the verandah.

Muriel was immediately beside him; and, looking in the direction her
aunt had pointed, they saw two canoes, containing three or four
white persons apiece, paddling madly for the “castle,” while behind,
just rounding the bend in the shore of the lake, appeared several
more canoes full of Indians, all half-naked and bedecked in
war-paint and feathers.




CHAPTER V--A RUNNING FIGHT


“It is what I expected and feared,” groaned Sergeant Dick; “the
Indians of the Paquita Reservation have revolted over the delay of
the Government in sending them the promised compensation for the
wrongful arrest of their chiefs last year in regard to these White
Hood outrages.”

“Pray Heaven that my uncle and cousins will be able to gain the
shelter of the ‘castle,’” panted Muriel. “My two cousins-in-law, the
wives of my cousins Abel and Aaron, are with them. What can we do to
help them?”

“Nothing as yet that I can see,” rejoined Dick; “they are too far
off for the carry of a rifle. Ah, they can hold their own, and will
win here safely, I think.”

Seven puffs of smoke had spurted from the two leading canoes.
Evidently the shots had found human billets in the pursuing crafts,
for two of these yawed wildly, and were run foul of by two of their
fellows with such force that all four canoes were upset, and their
occupants flung into the water.

And then from the right-hand side of the pair on the “castle”
verandah--from a point on the western shore, somewhat to the
northward--came the echo, loud and distinct, of the fusillade from
the fugitive canoes--seven separate reports in quick succession.

Sergeant Dick was surprised at the sharp-cut clearness of the echo,
and could almost have believed that it was no echo, but that seven
shots had been fired at the point whence the sound came.

But for that wonderful echo the reports of the fugitives’ rifles
would have been unheard by the two on the verandah of “Water
Castle,” and the pair in the ark. It accounted also for their
hearing the alarm-signal fired so far away down the lake.

Muriel read in the young trooper’s face his amazement at the echo,
and said:

“It is a curious phenomenon, and was known long before my uncle
built this house. A shot fired anywhere round the margin of the lake
is repeated from that shore and tossed to our ears here as if the
sound came directly from there.”

“Wonderful!”

“That was one of the reasons why my uncle chose this particular site
for his fortress. Of course, he and his sons, aided by some of the
other settlers and their cowboys, made the shoal by dumping into the
lake at the spot boatloads of rock blasted from the hills behind the
woods yonder.”

She pointed to the shore whence the echo had come.

“There are a lot of great cliff-like rocks over there. You can see
some of them peeping above the trees, and it is supposed that the
echo comes from them. The Indians used to call this lake ‘The Lake
of the Wonderful Echo.’”

A ringing chorus of derisive laughter now came across from the
western shore, clearly the echo of that with which Trapper Arnold
and his four sons and two daughters-in-law, in their canoes, had
hailed the temporary discomfiture of their red-skinned foes.

Sharp on the laughter came the echoing crash of rattling volley
after volley, broken occasionally by a stray shot or two.

Sergeant Dick and Muriel, even while they had been discussing the
wonderful echo, had seen the two fugitive canoes simply spouting
smoke and flame for several seconds, pouring in a ceaseless fire
from every rifle they contained into the embarrassed Indians, who
could be seen thrown into the utmost confusion.

Only one or two redskins replied to the devastating fire of their
white adversaries, and they were quickly silenced.

All the pursuing canoes fell behind; and, amid triumphant hurrahs
and more derisive laughter borne to the ears of those in the ark and
on the castle-verandah by the remarkable echo, the fugitives came on
again with redoubled speed in their direction.

In a few minutes the fleeing whites had put a considerable distance
between themselves and their red foes, who, making no further
attempt to pursue, fired after them in a desultory, enraged way.

“Hurray! Hurray! Your uncle and the lads and their wives have beaten
them off, Muriel!” roared Aunt Kate from the ark.

And she and Jenny now, having put that clumsy craft about, stood
away at full speed, with the wind abeam, to meet the fugitives.

“Yes, thank Heaven they have beaten them off!” cried Muriel. “The
red ruffians will probably now abandon the chase. My uncle and
cousins are safe.”

“The Indians are not in any great numbers,” said Sergeant Dick,
shading his eyes from the dazzling rays of the setting sun as he
peered in the direction of the fighting. “That means, I suppose,
that most of the bucks are raiding and murdering elsewhere. God help
the inmates of the more lonely ranches that the painted demons may
attack.”

The police officer and the girl remained on the verandah, watching
the ark and the two fugitive canoes rapidly approach each other, and
the discomfited redmen gradually evolve some order among themselves
again, and follow more warily, keeping up a dropping but impotent
fire at long range.

Slowly the red sun sank from sight behind the cliffs from which the
wonderful echo came; then rapidly the red streaks died out of the
western sky and dusk began to settle down over the lake and the
woods enclosing it.

It was almost dark, and the ark and the two leading canoes had
nearly met, when Muriel Arnold suddenly uttered a startled cry.

She had brought a pair of binoculars from the living-room, and was
attentively watching the ark and the canoes of her people through
it.

“More Indians! A great fleet of canoes has just come round the
southern bend, sergeant,” she gasped, handing Dick the glasses.

He looked through them and saw, as she had said, a great flotilla of
canoes--fully forty or fifty--rounding the bend and paddling swiftly
to join the half-dozen craft which had originally been chasing the
trappers.

“By Jove!” he murmured. “We are in for it with a vengeance. Thank
goodness your people have almost met, and the ark sails swiftly with
the wind on her beam. She’ll have it the same coming back, of
course. I wouldn’t have given her credit for so much speed. She can
outstrip a canoe no matter how fast it is paddled.”

“That is so, sergeant,” gleefully exclaimed Muriel. “We have often
run races, Jenny and I, or one of my cousins-in-law in the ark
against the canoes, manned by as many as they could hold. Some of
the cowboys and ranchmen from the nearest ranches have occasionally
taken part in the race--helped man the canoes. And the ark has
always won; that is if anything like a fair wind were blowing, of
course.”

Somehow, Sergeant Dick was not altogether pleased to hear that the
cowboys and owners of the nearest ranches came to “Water Castle” at
times, and were so friendly with its occupants.

He fell to wondering, even while he watched the exciting scene
transpiring upon the southern end of the lake through the
binoculars, whether any of the said cowboys or ranchmen came on
account of the lovely girl beside him, attracted by her beauty and
charm of manner. And he pictured, with a certain twinge of
heartburning and jealousy, her graceful form sitting on the verandah
with several handsome, dare-devil young cow-punchers bending
admiringly over her.

An awful, piercing, long-drawn-out yell or screech rang suddenly in
the ears of the pair on the verandah. It was the echo of the
war-whoop of the newly-arrived redmen.

Much has been written and told of the terrible battle-cry of the
American Indian, but one who has never heard it can have no
conception really of its terror-inspiring and nerve-shattering
shrillness and duration.

It has been likened to the shriek of “some maddened steam-engine,” a
long-drawn piercing screech, modulated by the fingers placed as
stops over the mouth. And it has been said that buffaloes on hearing
it have been known to sink in terror to the ground, and bears to
topple from a tree.

The effect of such a scream issuing in chorus from the throats of a
hundred or more painted savages, deservedly dreaded for their
ferocity and their cunning, might well strike panic to the hearts of
the first white settlers in the wild and woolly west. Especially
when such knew it was but the prelude to the fiercest of bloody
warfare, which, if successful, meant worse horrors--torture in the
most fiendish way before death came as a happy release.

No wonder then that Muriel Arnold shuddered, trembled from head to
foot, and clapped her hands over her ears, with agonized horror upon
her face, to shut out that horrible, ringing, thrilling scream
echoed from the western shore.

“Quick!” cried Sergeant Dick, “we must barricade the windows--put
the house everywhere in a fit state to resist a fierce siege. Those
hundred and more redmen are not going to quit here without a furious
and determined effort to capture or destroy this place and all
within it. We can do nothing as yet to succor your relations, Miss
Arnold, but we can get all in readiness, before their arrival, to
beat off the savages, or at any rate hold the wretches well at bay.
Ah, see!”

And he pressed the binoculars into the hands of the girl.

“The ark has met your uncle and cousins, and they are getting aboard
her. You may count them safe now from all pursuit so long as the
wind lasts; and it is not likely to drop for some time, blowing as
hard as it is. Come! We’ll see to all the windows--make preparations
for a possibly long and determined siege by the craftiest enemies
ever known.”

The first war-whoop of the more distant body of redskins was
answered by another from the half-dozen leading canoes--the original
pursuers, who now concentrated a heavy fire upon the ark as she took
aboard the fugitives.




CHAPTER VI--THE TRAPPER AND HIS SONS


Muriel waited to dart a glance through the glasses in the direction
of her relatives before following the police-sergeant into the
house.

She saw the ark lying almost broadside on, in the act of putting
about, with her cousins and cousins-in-law helping each other on to
the stern-quarter from the two canoes.

A sufficiently wide and high screen had been put up by her aunt to
cover Jenny at the tiller; and, from behind this shelter, Aunt Kate
herself was rapidly firing at the Indians in the leading canoes,
holding them well in check.

The strange echo from the western shore wafted the sounds of the
brisk exchange of shots to Muriel’s ears.

The screen her aunt and Jenny used was as big as two cabin doors
placed side by side. Several inches thick, and covered on both sides
with sheet iron, it was as much as two ordinary men could lift, yet
Aunt Kate had moved it with ease by herself.

It had two collapsing or folding legs on one side, like the back
legs of a pair of steps, so that it would stand upright. Furthermore
it was loopholed for rifle-fire.

Uncle Alf and his sons and daughters-in-law, as they scrambled
aboard from the canoes, were sheltered by the cabin from the fire of
their red enemies. Some of them, rushing inside the two
compartments, at once replied to it briskly--aided their mother in
keeping the assailants back while the canoes were got in.

Then round the scow was turned, the screen astern being moved with
the tiller to keep it or rather those at it still covered, and back
the craft came bowling, with bellying sail, towards the “castle”
again.

Muriel, half-laughing, half-crying with relief and satisfaction, now
ran inside the house after Sergeant Dick.

“Where are you, sergeant?” she called, and he answered from one of
the back bedrooms.

“My uncle and cousins are all safe aboard the ark, and are making
here as fast as the wind can blow them,” she called back. “Of course
they could not hope to hold their own in the ark against so many
canoes. The only thing is to defend the ‘castle’ to the bitter end.”

She passed through, as she spoke, into the central passage, from
which the six rooms of the “castle” all opened, and joined the
sergeant in the left-hand back bedroom.

That apartment contained four small square windows, two in the rear
wall, and two at the side.

Sergeant Dick had already secured two out of the four windows by
letting down sliding shutters set within the embrasures. These
shutters were, like the tiller-screen used on the ark, of stout wood
faced and backed by iron plating, and they were fastened in
position, when let down, by strong bolts, so that they could not be
easily forced from without.

The windows, being of the casement type, opened inward, and could be
hooked back against the wall. In each shutter was a loophole for
firing through.

Sergeant Dick noticed that the corner forming the outside angle of
the house was rounded off by an extra vertical balk of timber,
fitted triangular-wise into it, thus greatly increasing the
thickness of the two outer walls just there.

As the window on either hand was only a mere step from the corner, a
man stationed there could with ease defend both the back and side of
the house; and the extra thickness of the rounded angle would render
his position still more snug and safe.

“This is my married cousin Abel’s bedroom,” explained Muriel, as she
let down one of the shutters and shot home the two bolts on it.
“You’ve seen to all the windows in--which other room?”

“The one through that door,” replied John Dick, pointing towards the
front of the house.

Another door, alongside the one the girl had come in, led into a
bedroom between that they were in and the living-room.

There were no fewer than three doors in every room in the house, so
that it was possible to make a complete circuit of this without
utilizing the central passage, the idea being to enable the inmates,
in case of a siege or other emergency, like fire, passing quickly
from one room to another.

“Aaron and Deborah’s room,” Muriel said. “Come then, the bathroom
must be our next concern.”

She led the way through the third door into a room somewhat smaller,
fitted up with a large enameled iron bath--a piece of furniture
which considerably surprised Sergeant Dick to find in a Wild West
home of such limited dimensions, especially when built over a lake.

This apartment had its three doors like all the others, one in each
of the inner walls, and having shuttered and bolted the two windows
in it, the sergeant and Muriel went on into the next room.

“This is the room my cousin Jenny and I share,” explained the girl.

Had she not told him, Sergeant Dick would have guessed as much from
the female articles of dress and finery hanging around, as well as
the general subtle atmosphere of daintiness that prevailed.

Pictures hung on the walls here, including a pretty water-color
sketch of a lovely woman in evening dress.

There were _four_ windows in this room, and they had all to be
shuttered and made fast in like manner to the others. Then the man
and girl entered Uncle Alf and Aunt Kate’s bedroom adjoining,
secured the two windows there, and, passing through yet another
door, found themselves back in the living-room, the windows of which
they likewise secured.

“Now there only remains the front door,” said Muriel, adding, with a
laugh, “and we can’t very well fasten that up until my uncle and
aunt and the others are all safe inside with us.”

She stepped out again on to the verandah. And Dick, following her,
saw that the ark was coming on fast to the “castle,” and was not a
quarter of a mile away now, while the Indian canoes, although
paddling their swiftest in her wake, were fully half a mile off.

Laughing softly and yet tremulously over the escape of her relations
from their pursuers, Muriel remained at the front door with the
sergeant, while the ark drew nearer and nearer, until at last it was
close enough for its occupants to exchange greetings with her and
Dick.

These greetings were naturally curt and scant.

Sailing up to the open gateway in the palisades, Uncle Alf and his
sons warped the ark in by means of boathooks. Then the gate was
padlocked behind the craft, and she was drawn by a rope, which
Sergeant Dick threw from the verandah, alongside the hanging-ladder.

“Glad to have ye here, sergeant,” greeted Uncle Alf--a huge,
grizzled Hercules of a man--as he sprang up the steps and grasped
Dick’s hand cordially. “The more pairs of eyes behind the sights of
rifles, and hands to use the weapons, the better, in the face of
that crowd of painted, blood-thirsty rips. Ye’re more’n welcome,
sergeant.”

“’Specially if ye can shoot as straight as most of you troopers
can,” grinned the eldest son, Abel.

The rude witticism was received by all with a merriment that spoke
volumes for their dauntlessness, in the face of the red peril coming
on so fast behind them.

The ark was hurriedly moored alongside the verandah, the cabin doors
being locked with ordinary keys and then padlocked as well, so that
they might not be easily burst in if the savages got aboard.

The iron-plated tiller shield was brought into the house, and all
withdrew within this. Then the door was not only locked and bolted,
top and bottom, but also barricaded with stout logs, put
transversely across it, at intervals of only a few feet, within iron
sockets screwed on to the doorposts.

Sergeant Dick and the four women did the barricading, while the old
trapper and his four stalwart sons--all big, powerful men like
himself--hastily arranged as to where each of them should be
stationed.

Bella and Deborah Arnold, Muriel’s two cousins-in-law, had both of
them a certain amount of flamboyant beauty allied to a
devil-may-care air, well suited to the rather picturesque, if
unconventional, costumes they wore.

They were dressed like cowgirls, in short skirts, “wide-awake” hats,
and top boots; and round their waists they had cartridge-belts
supporting cases containing automatic pistols, while slung on their
backs were heavy Winchester repeaters.

“The pelts will be safe enough in the ark,” said old Alf. “The
painted rips are not likely to get inside the palisades ag’in our
rifles. If they do they’re more welcome to the pelts than to our
scalps. Now, sergeant, you and me ’ull defend this ’ere room, the
front of the house, with the old woman and Muriel. Abel, my eldest
son, will go to his bedroom, and hold the back and the right side of
the house with his wife. And, Amos, you will take your stand in the
middle room on the right-hand side--your brother Aaron’s room. Aaron
and Deborah, you two will take Muriel and Jenny’s room; and, Abner,
your mother’s and my room. Jenny, you will remain in the central
passage with all the doors open, and be ready to go to the aid of
any one who needs you, take round fresh ammunition, or refill the
water-buckets if necessary.”

Sergeant Dick, used as he was to the giving and receiving of
commands, as well as to prompt decision and arrangement in crises
like the present, was surprised in no small measure at the
military-like precision of the old trapper, as the latter thus
ordered the defense.

He had fully expected that all would look to him to do this.

But, doubtless, Dick told himself, Old Man Arnold had planned the
defense of the place repeatedly, and all his sons and daughters were
well schooled in the _rôles_ they were to play in it.

They had not long been at their posts--with jugs of drinking water
and water-buckets, in case of fire, placed handy--when the Indian
flotilla came within gunshot in the rapidly deepening darkness.

It at once divided into two parties, each taking opposite sides of
the lake, clearly so as to surround the “castle.”




CHAPTER VII--HOWLING WOLF


“They will land on Stable Islet, sure, and try and carry off the
horses there,” growled Uncle Alf. “They’ll tow the beasts off,
swimming, behind a canoe.”

“Better that,” said Muriel, “than that they should kill the animals
or burn them alive in the stable. Poor old Dobbin and Betty. I’ll
never see you again, I expect.”

“Wait,” said Sergeant Dick. “I will speak to the Indians. It is my
duty to. Perhaps I can pacify them--prevail on the mad fools to
abandon the warpath and return peacefully to the Reservation.”

Alf Arnold guffawed derisively.

“Mout as well try to reason with tigers that hev tasted or smelt
blood,” he said. “They’ll not listen to you, sergeant, but be far
more likely to give ye a volley. You’ll never be so dodrotted
foolish as to put your nose outside the door?”

“It is my duty as an officer of the law to try and avert bloodshed
and reason with them, and I mean to,” answered Dick quietly. “I am
going to unbar the door again.”

“Don’t show yourself, sergeant, for Heaven’s sake,” implored Muriel,
“or if you must, display a white flag first, and--and stand just
within the door, ready to skip behind it if they show any signs of
firing on you.”

She ran to the table-drawer, as Dick started unbarring the door, and
took out a folded, newly washed and ironed white tablecloth.

“Your blood ’ull be on your own head, sergeant,” said Uncle Alf.
“You are asking for it if you go outside that door. Still, in this
darkness you’ve a chance--just a chance--of coming in again unhurt,
mebbe.”

“What’s that? The sergeant going out to talk to ’em?” called the
youngest son, Abner, from his station in his parents’ bedroom. “He
must be dotty.”

“There’s one thing you’ve forgotten, father,” sang out the other
unmarried son, Amos, from the room opposite. “The skylights.”

“Jumping snakes, so I had! Jenny and Muriel--no, Amos, you’d better
see to ’em. You can be spared from your loophole long enough to,
sure, ’specially as the sergeant here’s agoin’ to hold ’em in talk
an hour or two. Ha, ha, ha!”

His sons within hearing and Jenny echoed his laughter; and Amos came
out into the central passage, and, opening a cupboard door in it,
passed inside.

Within the cupboard was a sloping ladder leading up to a trap-door
in the flat ceiling or inner log-roof.

As soon as he had unfastened the front door, Sergeant Dick stepped
out onto the verandah or landing-stage, and waved the tablecloth to
and fro. Muriel had tied the improvised flag of truce to the muzzle
of his rifle.

Putting his open left hand to his mouth trumpet-fashion, he roared
at the top of his voice:

“My redskin brothers, I want speech with you. I am a policeman, a
sergeant of the Royal Mounted Police. Can you hear me?”

It was so dark now that he could hardly make out the black smudges
the canoes made upon the water; and he feared that the Indians would
not be able to discern his figure against the background of the
“castle,” in spite of his red coat.

No answering hail came back from the canoes; but he was satisfied
that his voice had carried to the ears within them.

And the Indians could hardly fail to observe his white flag, if not
himself.

“Miss Arnold,” he called within the doorway, “will you take this
electric torch from me and shine it upon me so that they may be able
to see me plainly?”

“Oh, no, no! That will be to make a target of yourself--to show you
up plainly as a mark for their bullets.”

“Do as I ask. They are coming in; they see the white flag.”

“I can’t have that there door open too long, sergeant,” called out
Uncle Alf. “You know redskin cunning, and I ain’t agoin’ to allow
’em to come in too close with that door open, nor without afirin’ on
’em neither.”

Muriel, without further demur, tremblingly took the proffered
electric torch from Dick and, standing inside the doorway, flashed
it upon his red-coated figure.

“You see and hear me, my redskin brothers,” John Dick shouted again.
“Go back to your wigwams and squaws and papooses, like sensible men,
and give up your foolish idea of going on the warpath, and so
bringing down upon you the terrible vengeance of Government. What is
your quarrel with us white men? It was not the fault of the fathers
of this land, of the Canadas, that the money was not paid before. It
was the delay of our brothers over the frontier--of the Fathers of
the United States. And the money has been sent you now, as I can
swear. My redskin brothers know that they can believe the word of an
officer of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.”

“The chief, Howling Wolf, will speak to the redcoat officer,” came
back a faint shout.

“Mind yourself, sergeant. Howlin’ Wolf’s a chief with no good
reputation to lose. He’s the wickedest of the hull boilin’ lot of
’em red-skinned varmint on Paquita Island, though he ain’t there
now, more’s the pity; for he’s to be dreaded more’n all the others
yonder.”

“Yes, be on your guard, sergeant, for Heaven’s sake. We’ve all heard
of Howling Wolf’s ferocity and cunning,” added Muriel. “I feel sure
you are only risking your life to no good. You’ll not turn them from
their purpose after my uncle and cousins killing some of their
number.”

“That’s right,” chimed in Aunt Kate in her deep, siren-like voice.
“You and the lads, Alf, just now down the lake, sent some on ’em to
the happy hunting-grounds, didn’t ye? It looked so to us, anyways.”

“Sure we did, a good half-dozen on ’em; and more carry the marks of
our bullets on ’em, if they haven’t got the lead still under their
skins. Haw, haw, haw! You’ll never pacify them now, sergeant. They
thirst for our blood in revenge, and they’re not to be turned away
by mere words, as you may find to your cost. But a willful man will
have his way; and, as I said afore, if anything happens to ye, your
blood is on your own head.”

All the canoes remained as stationary black smudges afar off, except
one, which came speeding swiftly towards “Water Castle.”

It came on without a word from any of its occupants, who Sergeant
Dick was soon able to discern were four in number, to all
appearances.

And then suddenly a jet of flame leaped like a fiery bowsprit from
the curved prow of the canoe; and, even as the report of a rifle
rang over the silent waters, waking echoes far and near out of the
black night, Sergeant Dick heard the “zip” of a bullet, felt the
wind from it fan his right cheek, and heard it clang against the
iron-plated tiller-screen which had been set just within the
doorway.

Rebounding upwards on account of the backwardly slanting angle at
which the screen stood, the leaden messenger ended its flight by
burying itself in the wooden ceiling of the living-room.

Muriel screamed, and Sergeant Dick was within the house at a bound.

“Miss Arnold, are you hurt at all?” he asked, anxiously, catching
her in his arms as she reeled against the door.

“No, no; but you?”

His reply that he was untouched was drowned to all other ears but
hers by the sharp “crack-crack-crack!” of the rifles of Uncle Alf
and Aunt Kate as they returned the treacherous shot, concentrating a
ceaseless fire for several seconds upon Howling Wolf’s canoe.

But the four paddlers had promptly thrown themselves prone in its
bottom, and in the thickening darkness the craft presented but an
indifferent mark, so that it was doubtful if a single shot struck
it.

Instantly the dreaded war-whoop of the savages pealed forth, awaking
still greater echoes than the rifle-fire. And, like a pack of hounds
let loose, all the black, indistinct smudges behind the chief’s
canoe came racing for “Water Castle.”

“Quick, secure the door there!” roared Uncle Alf. “Ye see, sergeant,
the folly of your attempt to palaver with ’em.”

Amos came rushing from the ladder-cupboard in the central passage,
and roughly jostled Sergeant Dick aside from the rebarring of the
door.

“Get to your loophole,” he snarled, resentfully, “and show your
mettle wi’ your rifle. You mout hev bin the death of the gal.
Muriel, you take another window! I’ll see to the securing o’ the
door.”




CHAPTER VIII--THE SIEGE OF “WATER CASTLE”


Though inwardly resenting Amos Arnold’s behavior and words, Sergeant
Dick at once went to one of the windows in the front of the house,
and thrust his rifle through the slit in the armored shutter.

Not a rifle “barked” now; all the shooting had ceased. The inmates
of the “castle” were reserving their fire until the canoes should
draw near enough to allow of their taking fairly accurate aim in the
darkness; and the Indians, after that first wild whoop of the onset,
gave their whole attention to getting close in.

There were six windows in the front, and two more to either side, of
the living-room, which therefore contained ten loopholes, as well as
the door.

Uncle Alf had posted himself in the west front corner, and his wife
was in the corresponding corner on the east side.

Sergeant Dick and Muriel took a window on either side of the door;
and Amos, having quickly made this fast again, rushed back to his
prearranged station in his brother Aaron’s bedroom.

Howling Wolf and his four companions, lying prostrate in their
drifting canoe, were the first to resume firing. Five streams of
fire spurted simultaneously from the shapeless smudge their craft
now appeared in the gloom, and as many bullets thudded harmlessly
against the logs of the “castle,” and buried themselves in the thick
walls.

At once all four whites in the front room focused their rifles upon
the canoe and poured in volley after volley.

In the hope of putting a swift termination to the revolt by killing
Howling Wolf, who was evidently, from what he had heard of the man,
the chief promoter and fomenter of it, Sergeant Dick aimed at the
prow where he believed the Indian chief lay.

All his shots flew true to their mark, and on his third shot
striking the craft four dark figures were seen to jump up in it and
literally throw themselves overboard.

Such was their mad haste to get into the comparative safety of the
water that they overset the canoe, and it floated bottom upwards.

“Hurray! One of ’em’s settled, that’s pretty sartin,” yelled Old Man
Arnold, gleefully. “Only four leaped out. The fella in the bows
didn’t, and that should be Howling Wolf hisself.”

“Do you think he’d be fool enough to remain in the bows arter giving
himself away with his first shot?” asked his wife, contemptuously.
“I thought you knowed Indian cunning better nor that, Alf.”

“Anyways, one on ’em’s settled, and it’s as likely to be him as
not,” returned the old man testily.

All the defenders could now be heard firing rapidly--from every
quarter of the house. The Indians on the east side were the first to
reply to the fusillade, and those on the west side and in front
quickly chimed in.

But it was so inky dark now that only the flashes of the redmen’s
rifles revealed their whereabouts to their white foes, who were thus
firing almost at random.

Thud, thud, thud! The besiegers’ bullets rattled like hail against
the stout walls of the castle; but so thick were these that not one
entered.

Clang! An occasional shot found the iron-plated door or a shuttered
window.

On the other hand, the defenders, sighting swiftly in the direction
of a rifle-flash, were gratified again and again by hearing the
death-shriek or scream of pain from a stricken enemy; and Sergeant
Dick’s companions were quick to note that he never fired a single
shot but there came such an answer.

He had realized that it would be madness to hold his hand or seek to
spare the redmen, in the circumstances. It was their lives or the
lives of all in the “castle.”

Under cover of the now pitchy darkness the Indians were likely to
reach the house; and, once they were swarming about it in their
canoes, in such numbers as they were, nothing could prevent some of
them getting upon the roof or bursting in the windows and door.

They must be kept at bay at all costs.

Putting all pitying thoughts for the misguided wretches, therefore,
out of his heart, he grimly watched the successive rifle-flashes in
front of him, and shot back straight for one or another.

None of the other inmates of “Water Castle” knew of the fame and
nickname he had won among his fellow-troopers of the Mounted Police
for his deadly skill with the rifle, but “Sure-shot Jack Dick” never
deserved his reputation and _sobriquet_ better than he did now.

“Jumping snakes, sergeant, but you seem to be makin’ ’em squeal!”
shouted Old Man Arnold delightedly. “Dang me if I don’t hear a yelp
every time you fires!”

“That’s so,” cried Muriel, almost proudly. “I don’t believe he has
thrown away a single shot.”

“Good boy! Keep it up,” roared the lion-like old woman. “He has
cat’s eyes, sure. I wish I had. This blamed darkness beats me. Peg
away, lads! Keep it up or we’ll have the devils on us with this
blamed darkness. I wish them palisades outside were higher, Alf.”

“Reckon they’ll not get over ’em easy all the same, old woman. Say,
wish I had put up a searchlight or somethink of that kind on the
peak of the roof, so as to show up besiegers at night.”

But the hot fire maintained by the defenders, and particularly the
amazingly deadly shooting of Sergeant Dick, checked the onset of the
Indians. Canoe after canoe ceased paddling forward and turned about,
its occupants no longer caring to risk bringing a bullet out of the
darkness into their midst by shooting at the black shadow which
represented the stronghold of their enemies.

So many of their number had been hit that it seemed as if the
pale-faces could see in the dark, and, in their superstition and
ignorance, the redmen were inclined to believe that there was
witchcraft in such swift retribution whenever they fired a shot.

Their firing dwindled. Instead of pressing on to the storm of their
enemies’ stronghold, they began to circle futilely round it, firing
only an occasional shot and then paddling swiftly away to escape the
expected bullet in return.

“We’ve checked them. They’re keeping off, father,” yelled Aaron from
Jenny and Muriel’s bedroom, in the north-east corner of the house.

The words were still ringing in the ears of the four in the front of
the house, which, as already explained, faced southward down the
lake, when Sergeant Dick saw three or four large, roundish black
objects, like pumpkins--or, rather, like Swedish turnips with the
leaves sticking up in the air--suddenly appear as if by magic on the
edge of the verandah!

The strange spectacle was impressed as it were forever on the retina
of his eyes. Ever afterwards he could call up the strange vision at
will of those three or four large round, turnip-like, apparently
leaf-crowned objects, growing, as it seemed, along the edge of the
verandah.

As his startled eyes rested upon them, a horrified gasp burst from
Muriel at the window on the other side of the door, and a curse and
a roar of rage respectively from the lips of Old Man Arnold and his
wife.

The four turnip-like objects were the feather-crowned heads of four
Indians, who had swum silently in through the palisades up to the
house and had climbed up as many of the piles supporting the
verandah.

Even as the four defenders in the living-room of the “castle”
discovered them they swung themselves up like cats, by means of the
pillars of the verandah, on to this and made a dash at the windows.

Muriel, Aunt Kate, and Sergeant Dick had their rifle-barrels
clutched by the invaders. Old Man Arnold managed to whip his back
inside his loophole in time.

The assailants would not, of course, have been able to retain hold
of the rifle-barrels had the defenders not slackened their fire some
time before and allowed the metal to cool.

Swift upon their grab at the protruding tubes, the redmen hurled in
with unerring aim through the loophole-slits a knife or a tomahawk.

It was assuredly only because Providence was watching over the fates
of Sergeant John Dick and Muriel Arnold in that hour that they did
not have a knife apiece buried to the haft in their faces, standing
looking out of the loopholes as they were.

As it was, Sergeant Dick had his left cheek gashed open by one knife
in its passage; and Muriel felt the missile directed at her pass
through her hair.

As for Mrs. Arnold, a tomahawk cleft her gray forelock short off
close to her scalp. Flying onward with the force of its fling, the
weapon struck and bit deep into the pantry door behind her, where it
stuck, quivering from blade to handle-butt.

Her husband, too, had a narrow escape. The tomahawk hurled in at him
whizzing close past his head, as he stumbled sideways after pulling
in his rifle.

As all four in the living-room stood for the moment appalled by
their own narrow escapes, and the belief that one or more of their
number must have been struck down, their assailants outside emitted
the bloodcurdling war-whoop in chorus.

Then, swift upon it, or, rather, while still giving vent to it, the
four daring braves wheeled, abandoned the rifle-barrels they had
grabbed, and, darting to pillars, began swarming up these to the
sloping roof like monkeys.

At either end of the verandah there was a low railing, and, by
stepping on this, two of them were clambering on to the roof almost
before the sergeant and his three companions in the living-room
could recover from the sudden attack.

The whoops of the quartet just outside were promptly answered by a
tremendous yell from the darkness all round about; and it was plain
the Indians in the canoes were again tearing towards the house, as
fast as they could ply their paddles, to help their intrepid and
crafty chief to rush the place.

For, perhaps needless to say, the four braves on the verandah were
Howling Wolf and three of those who had been with him in his canoe.

Aunt Kate had been right. The wily young sagamore had withdrawn from
the prow of the canoe, and wriggled aft, after firing his
treacherous shot at the police-sergeant. And Sergeant Dick might
have fired the three shots he put into the canoe’s prow uselessly
had his third bullet not struck a rifle left there and been
deflected sideways, so that it grazed the head of the fifth warrior
in the craft, stunning him.

On that, at the sagamore’s order, the others had jumped overboard,
and, when the canoe overset, Howling Wolf aided the unconscious man,
supported him on his shoulder, and suggested the daring move of
swimming silently up to the “castle” and taking the defenders in the
front of the house by surprise.

The four, as we have seen, brought off the stratagem fairly
successfully. They had put their senseless companion softly across
one of the ties of the gate in the palisades, had consulted and laid
their plans in the faintest of faint whispers as they had swum up to
these, then slipped through them. And only the proverbial white
man’s luck had saved the four defenders of the living-room from
being struck down, dead or dying, by their deftly in-flung tomahawks
and knives.




CHAPTER IX--THE ARK IN DANGER


Had the four defenders of the front of the “castle” been slain or
disabled through the loopholes by Howling Wolf and his three
companions, these would have got on the roof safely enough, and
might have been able to cause a sufficient diversion, and hold their
own there long enough, to enable their fellow-braves in the canoes
to come up.

But Sergeant Dick, quick to recover from the startling _coup de
main_, promptly thrust his rifle out through his loophole again, and
trained it on the brave nearest him. The man was in the act of
clambering up one of the middle pillars of the verandah.

Crack! The weapon spoke almost simultaneously, and, with a shrill
howl of pain, the Indian--none other than Howling Wolf himself--let
go his grip of the verandah roof, which he had just seized with one
hand, and slid down the pole as swiftly as if it were greased. He no
sooner touched the verandah again with his heels than he either
flung himself or fell headlong off it into the water.

Sergeant Dick swerved his rifle quickly on the man’s plunge, and let
fly at another of the invaders swarming up a pillar. A second
scream, of even bitterer agony, told every ear within hearing that
that shot also had found a true billet.

On that, one of the two remaining braves, who had gained the
comparative safety of the roof--thanks to the assistance of the side
railings and the consternation and unreadiness of the other three
defenders of the living-room--took a flying jump or dive into the
lake astern of the ark, evidently too scared to take advantage of
the situation he had won.

And a second or two later, the fourth Indian, not caring to remain
behind by himself, followed suit.

Then, even as Bella and Deborah, the two daughters-in-law of the
squatter, came rushing after Jenny into the living-room from the
back of the “castle,” to learn if their father and mother were hurt,
the rifles of the four brothers rang out and partly drowned the mad
yelling of the redmen paddling frantically for the spot.

“It’s all right, gals. Me and the old woman air not a bit hurt.” Old
Alf reassured his daughters-in-law and the weeping Jenny. “The old
woman’s had her forelock shorn off, but her scalp’s safe, and she
can wear a false front till the ’air grows ag’in. How are you,
Muriel, gal, and you, sergeant?”

“I’m unhurt, uncle,” gasped Muriel. “The knife only went through my
hair. It’s brought some of it down, and cut some of it; but that’s
all right. Did you escape scot free also, sergeant?”

“Not altogether, I must admit. It is nothing, however; the knife
blade just grazed my left cheek. Never mind that. Back to your
loops, every one of you, quick, or we’ll have the whole band of
redskins clambering over the palisades or breaking open the gate in
them. Ah! quick! Howling Wolf and the braves with him are trying to
make off with the ark!”

He was the only one of the four defenders of the living-room who had
not quitted his post or loophole.

The squatter, on hearing his wife cry out as the tomahawk shore away
her hair so close to her scalp, had at once turned his eyes in her
direction. He saw her fall heavily backwards, for so startled and
horrified was she that for the moment she did not quite comprehend
the narrow escape she had had and almost believed the top of her
skull had been cleft clean away.

The ax tore some of the hairs out by the roots in its passage as
well as cut others clean asunder, and the sudden wrench and sharp,
poignant pain of it, on top of her surprise and the horror of seeing
the ax flashing apparently straight for her forehead, practically
deprived her, strong, masculine woman though she generally was, of
the power of her limbs, and bowled her over like an actual blow.

Fully believing her killed--brained by the weapon--her husband and
Muriel had uttered cries of horror and grief unutterable, and flown
to her side. This accounted for Sergeant Dick being the only one to
fire upon the four daring invaders of the verandah.

At Dick’s fresh admonition and alarm, Aunt Kate, Uncle Alf, Muriel,
and the two sisters-in-law, with Jenny--all six--at once rushed to
the three loopholes before them--that is on the east side of the
front door--and peered out through these.

Before they could do so, there rattled out, above the firing from
the other quarters of the house, the sharp incessant popping of
Sergeant Dick’s service revolver.

Old Alf was the first of his party to look forth, and he saw--first,
the brave whom the sergeant had killed while climbing up the pillar,
lying stiff and motionless upon the verandah, and then the ark, in
the thick darkness, slowly swinging round her stern away from the
“castle.”

The craft was still fast by her head to the verandah, but she was no
longer lying parallel alongside this, but turning her stern away, so
as to lie at right angles to it.

Hanging head downwards over the stern bulwark, still in sight, was
the form of an Indian, and a great dark stain was growing in size
just below him upon the ark’s ribs. The hand of a second redskin
projected at a sharp, unnatural angle above the bulwark alongside.

Sergeant Dick, keeping watchful vigil at his loop, when the others
in the front of the premises had deserted theirs, had suddenly seen
three dusky forms rise above the off stern-quarter bulwark of the
ark, writhe or bound aboard with the swiftness and silence of cats
or snakes, and make a combined rush for the mooring-rope aft.

Before the sergeant had time to draw a bead upon any of the trio,
one Indian was slashing at the rope with a tomahawk, while the other
two were pushing hard, with their dripping rifles, upon the side of
the verandah, so as not only to tauten the mooring rope, and enable
their comrade the better to cut it, but also to get “way” or motion
on the craft’s stern, and force her round “head on” to the “castle”
as quickly as possible.

The rope parted at the second slash. The first indeed might have
done the trick had the savage wielding the tomahawk only been a
little less excited and eager; for no doubt the weapon was as
keen-bitted as a razor.

Even as the rope was severed, Sergeant Dick’s revolver began to
speak, and the two braves thrusting the craft away from the verandah
with their rifles crumpled up and fell dead. They dropped their
pieces over the side, and one of them nearly followed his weapon.

The third Indian--he who had wielded the ax--did not give the
sergeant a chance to hit him. At the first crack of the revolver, he
wheeled and stooping low--almost double--bolted, jumping from side
to side as he ran, round the deckhouse, and got behind it.

Along either side of the deckhouse ran a foot-board, about a foot
wide, on top of the bulwarks, with a handrail above to enable a
person to pass safely from stem to stern. Short ladders, fore and
aft, also gave easy access to the roof of the ark, which was not
high peaked or gabled like the conventional toy ark, but gently
rounded like a railway carriage-roof, or that of the cabin of a
small yacht.

It was Howling Wolf, the intrepid and enterprising, if ferocious,
Indian chief, who had again escaped the deadly fire of Sergeant
Dick. He had been only slightly wounded in his attempt to scale the
roof of the “castle.” The bullet had grazed his thigh, but the
sudden smart had momentarily paralyzed the muscles of the leg, and
so brought him down at a run.

The limb was now almost as good as his other leg--warmed up, as he
was with the battle fever, and thirsting to avenge the smart and the
loss of his braves.

This was the position of affairs when the other occupants of the
living-room of the “castle” looked out of the loopholes.

Before them was the ark, still held fast by the mooring-rope in the
bows, turning slowly at right angles to them with the drift of the
current, accelerated by the little “way” or push given to her stern
by the two Indians whom the sergeant had shot down. And round the
other side of the deckhouse, screened by it from the rifle-fire of
the rightful owners of the craft, was Howling Wolf, whose ax could
already be heard crashing upon the stout, sheet-iron-lined shutter
of the cabin window beside him.

All around, in the inky blackness, invisible canoes were speeding
up, propelled by madly whooping redskins, none of whom was replying
save by shouting, to the wild random shooting of the besieged.




CHAPTER X--AN UNEXPECTED ILLUMINATION


Old Alf Arnold gave vent to a roar of anger when he saw the position
of the ark.

“Thousand furies! That varmint will carry off the scow if he’s not
stopped. Help me unbar the door, quick, some of you! I’m going out
to purvent it. You two girls, Bella and Deborah, take your
brothers’, Amos and Abner’s, places in the side bedrooms, and tell
the lads to follow me. Sergeant, you’ll come too, won’t you? Kate,
Muriel, and Jenny, you three guard the loops here.”

“Oh, no, no, father, don’t go out! You are bound to be shot if you
show yourselves outside!” cried Jenny, in the wildest alarm.

“Yes. Let the ark take care of itself, uncle,” exclaimed Muriel,
also in the deepest anxiety. “The Indians in the canoes will pick
you off if you go out, and that one on the ark is powerless to run
off with her while she is fast by her head to the verandah. He will
not venture to show himself, to cut her loose.”

“No, but it will shelter the riptiles behind it at the palisades,
and a dozen of ’em may git over and swim to it; and then where’d we
be?” growled Aunt Kate, who had quite recovered apparently from the
shock of the loss of her forelock.

And the old woman rushed to the door with her husband, and began
hurriedly unbarring it.

Bella and Deborah raced off to take the places of their
brothers-in-law in the side rooms; and Muriel turned and whispered
something in Jenny’s ear.

“I’m with you, Arnold,” Sergeant Dick said quietly, though he still
stood at his loop, revolver in hand, refilling the discharged
chambers in the weapon, and, with his eye on the stern of the scow,
ready to fire if Howling Wolf showed himself.

The front door was thrown open, and instantly out rushed the old
squatter, automatic in one hand and rifle atrail in the other; and
after him ran Sergeant Dick, likewise armed.

Then, after a short pause, followed Abner and Amos, the two
unmarried sons.

The instant Old Alf and the sergeant appeared upon the verandah,
there were infuriated yells from the canoes in front of the “castle”
and a scattered volley was fired at them. But all the bullets
imbedded themselves harmlessly in the stout logs of the “castle”;
and, racing along the verandah unscathed, the two white men gained
the head of the ark, which, however, was now a good six feet or more
from the verandah--the full length of the mooring-rope there.

The squatter, balked, pounced upon the mooring-rope, and hauled
desperately upon it, bawling to the sergeant to lay hold also and
pull.

Instead, John Dick backed quickly to the “castle,” took a run, and
leaped out beside the rope towards the broad bluff bow of the scow.

He landed just within it on both feet. But he fell forward on his
hands and knees.

Up again the next second, he dashed towards the deckhouse, and,
before the cheer that greeted his fine jump from all who witnessed
it, was bounding up the forward ladder to the roof of the cabin.

He was now fully exposed to the fire of the Indians in the canoes,
but his form was not very distinct in the blackness of the night.
Moreover, the rapidity of his movements made him a still more
difficult target.

Panning along the same side of the deckhouse on which Howling Wolf
had been sheltering, Dick peered over, revolver ready cocked and
presented for a shot.

But the Indian chief was no longer on the side of the scow.

The sternmost shutter, swinging loose and wide open, told Dick where
he was--that he had forced the window and got into the cabin.

The ark was now at right angles with the verandah, and was slowly
swinging round into an obtuse angle with it. If permitted, the
current would eventually swing her right round, end for end--lay her
thus, parallel with the verandah again, but beyond it to the
southward.

“He’s got inside the cabin,” shouted Dick.

He sprang down the aft ladder, rushed to the door there, and
thundered upon it with his rifle-butt, on failing to burst it in
with his shoulder.

There were two loopholes in the stern bulkhead of the cabin, one on
either side of the door. But the Indian chief inside had had his
ammunition and firearms rendered useless by his immersions, and so
could not fire out on his daring white foe.

The deckhouse door was giving way before Dick’s frantic battering
upon it with his rifle-butt, and he could feel the ark moving
through the water up to the “castle,” as the old squatter and Amos
and Abner, lying prone on the verandah, pulled upon the bow-rope,
when there was a scrambling noise at the broken window, succeeded by
a loud plunge and splash in the water alongside.

Realizing that his position was getting too warm for him, Howling
Wolf had leaped out through the window into the lake again.

Sergeant Dick at once rushed to that side, but, filled with generous
admiration for the daring and persevering enterprise of the redman,
forbore to shoot at him when his head rose above the
surface--showing like a black ball upon the less dark surface of the
water.

Howling Wolf dived again immediately, and the shots, fired at random
in his direction by the less chivalrous squatters, only hit the
water harmlessly.

And now there burst a great flood of lurid light upon the scene--an
illumination which lit up the surroundings of the “castle” for a
considerable distance all round, beyond the palisading.

Sergeant Dick, astonished beyond measure, turned his head swiftly in
the direction whence the light emanated, half expecting to see the
“castle” on fire.

Instead, he saw, reared above the skylight on his side of the
apex-like roof of the “castle,” a great blazing tar barrel,
suspended by a small chain from a boathook stuck up through the
skylight.

The glare cast an awe-inspiring ruddy glow on everything, and seemed
to strike fire itself from the dark water flowing within the “dock.”

Not only did it show up the canoes, but their redskinned occupants
in the act, for the most part, of getting upon the palisades, and
lifting their light craft over into the “dock.”

Some of the Indians had slipped through the palisades, and were
swimming everywhere, all round, for the “castle.” But by far the
great majority were trying to get the canoes over. The top of nearly
every palisade was crowned by a half-nude copper-colored,
befeathered human form, lifting and straining, while around him,
within and without the palisading, others were swimming or clinging
to the timbers and trying to help him.

Two canoes had been lifted over and their late occupants were
clambering into them again, preparatory to following those swimming
for the verandah.

Sergeant Dick was unable to do more for a moment or two than stare
helplessly at the thrilling spectacle. But he was speedily brought
to a sense of his own danger by the crackle of over a dozen rifles
from the canoes beyond the storming line, and the thudding of as
many bullets into the bulkhead of the ark’s cabin behind him.

Muriel Arnold had bethought herself of the tar-barrel, faced as she
was with the problem how to provide an illumination which would show
up the besiegers--prevent them getting in their canoes within the
“dock,” and thus rushing the “castle” or ark. It was of the
tar-barrel she had whispered to Jenny; and, leaving Aunt Kate to
guard the partly open door of the “castle,” the two girls had rushed
to the ladder leading up to the loft.

The tar-barrel was stored there with other lumber. They had
hurriedly looped a chain round it and through the bunghole, and put
it, on the end of the boathook, through the skylight on the verandah
side of the house.

Jenny dropped a lighted match into the contents, and then she and
Muriel, exerting all their strength, thrust the boathook up, and
jammed it firmly so that it might not slip.

They had raced back, down the ladder, to the living-room, little
suspecting how near they came to costing Sergeant Dick his life by
the sudden and wholly unexpected illumination.

As the apex roof of the “castle” was covered with corrugated iron,
there was no risk of any fragments of the blazing barrel setting it
on fire; and the barrel swung well clear of the wooden staff of the
boathook, which was tipped with iron a good third of its length.

Sergeant Dick saw and felt that the ark was being drawn back by the
squatter and his two sons into its late moored position alongside
the verandah; and so he at once ran round to that side of the
deckhouse.

He stepped upon the narrow footboard bordering the cabin wall, and
was safe from the fire of all the Indians except those on the west
side of the “castle.” And as he sidled swiftly along the plank,
holding to the rail, like the driver or fireman of a locomotive
clambering round it, he presented a difficult mark again,
particularly in the dancing, uncertain glare of the tar-barrel.

He could see Old Alf, Amos, and Abner pulling on the inside bow and
shifting their grip along as the craft swung her stern slowly in
towards the verandah again.

But the sight of the swimmers making for the verandah, as well as
the two canoes within the palisading, told Sergeant Dick that the
best thing he and the three men heaving on the ark’s bow could do
would be to take refuge inside her.

The hail of bullets now being poured upon the ark and the front of
the “castle” from the reserve canoes outside the palisades seemed to
forbid the smallest hope of him or the other three getting back
safely within the house.

He therefore bawled at the top of his voice:

“Bar the door, Mrs. Arnold--Muriel--Jenny! Never mind us out here!
Arnold, we four must get inside the ark, and hold it.”




CHAPTER XI--THE DEFENSE OF THE ARK


Sergeant Dick knew that the old squatter had the keys of the cabin
doors upon him; that there would be no necessity for them to force
an entrance.

“Right you are, sergeant!” Arnold answered; and, as the side of the
ark bumped heavily against the verandah, the old man and his two
sons vaulted hurriedly aboard, and dashed at the door near them.

Even as the key rattled in the lock, and Old Alf pushed the door in,
Sergeant Dick sprang round the corner of the “house” or cabin.
Nevertheless, inside he was within an ace of being shut
out--purposely or accidentally--by Abner Arnold, who was slamming
the door in his face, when he flung himself bodily against it, and,
by main force, thrust it open sufficiently to slip inside.

“Did you want to shut me out?” he demanded, in fierce suspicion of
the young squatter. Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned
and helped to shoot home the bolts and put up the heavy wooden bars
which stood ready for the purpose.

Old Alf and Amos were rushing through into the second cabin, to make
sure of the door and broken window there.

The rattling of musketry continued unabatedly outside, and bullets
thudded against the door and the stout log-walls of the cabin like
hail. As soon as the door was secure, Sergeant Dick sprang to the
first loop on the south, or offside, of the craft, and looked forth.

He saw the plumed heads of several savage warriors ranged along the
bulwark of the scow. They were in the very act of clambering aboard!

As in the attack on the “castle,” he instantly decided to use his
automatic instead of his rifle, which, however, he had carried hung
upon his right shoulder, ready for instant use. While hurrying along
the footboard at the side of the cabin, he had seen to his
pistol--made sure that it was reloaded to its utmost capacity.

With ten lives in the deadly little weapon, he thrust its short
barrel out through the loophole, and opened a merciless fusillade
upon the Indians clambering aboard.

At every bark of the weapon there was an agonized scream outside.
Four of the redmen either lay head downwards over the bulwarks or
had fallen back into the lake, in less than as many seconds. The
others, with screams of dismay, whipped down again out of
sight--all, that is, in front of his loop.

But in the scow’s waist, and at her far end John Dick could hear the
triumphant yells of the Indians mingled with the crackle of his
fellow defenders’ revolvers.

Abner Arnold had remained at the door by which they had got in, and
was firing out through a loophole he had uncovered in it. A steel
slide was fitted into grooves over a horizontal slit, about two
inches wide, and six or eight long. Through this aperture the young
squatter had his revolver thrust, and was potting fiercely at the
Indians trying to climb over that end of the scow.

“You can hold your own, Abner?” the sergeant asked.

“Yes, curse you, yes!” was the fierce reply.

“Right. Then I’ll go along to the next cabin and see if your father
and brother need me.”

The cabin he was in was fitted up, in rather primitive style, as a
dining-compartment, or “saloon” and kitchen in one. A table-top was
hooked up within a couple of inches of the slightly rounded,
coach-like roof, and might be lowered by cords passing through rings
to the level of an ordinary table.

On either side of the cabin ran a banked seat, which could be
converted into two beds or berths--that is four in all--while there
were hooks for hammocks if there were any call for additional
sleeping accommodation.

Under the banked seats were lockers and drawers, most neatly made,
and on the four walls--over the doors and flanking these, as well as
on the two side walls--were little cupboards and all manner of
cooking utensils and other domestic equipage.

In one corner of the apartment stood a small American iron stove,
the pipe of which passed out through a hole in the eaves of the
roof.

Pursuant to his expressed intention, Sergeant Dick passed hurriedly
through the inner door into the other cabin, which was much better
furnished, and evidently reserved for the womenfolk. There was no
table hooked up, nor any stove, but there were banked seats for four
beds, as well as hooks for hammocks, a couple of
looking-glasses--the worse for frequent use--on the walls, a couple
of lift-up dressing ledges, etc., and four wardrobe cupboards, one
in each corner, for storage purposes, in addition to more lockers
and little cupboards.

John Dick took in only the faintest idea of the apartment, of
course. Naturally his thoughts were elsewhere at that moment than
with the structure of Old Alf Arnold’s strange houseboat.

He saw the old man firing out sideways, with a revolver, through a
loophole nearer him than the window with the broken shutter, and
Amos kneeling at the end-door, shooting through the lower loophole
in it. The younger man was casting anxious glances, ’tween whiles,
at the broken window, which gaped open--a square foot and more--for
any redskin foe to shoot in at.

As a matter of fact, several bullets whizzed in through it and
buried themselves with loud thuds in the opposite wall.

It was to prevent any of the Indians reaching the window that his
father was firing sideways, chiefly through the adjacent loops. Amos
had clearly run past the open window on hands and knees.

Neither he nor his father, Sergeant Dick saw, could be spared from
their posts to try to cover the broken window. Both men had their
hands full, for the time being at any rate, keeping the assailants
from getting aboard.

On the other hand it would not do for the sergeant himself to leave
Abner Arnold too long alone to hold the other cabin. Some of the foe
would be bound to return to the quarter left undefended, and if not
checked would smash in the two loops or shuttered windows at the
point.

With his usual promptitude and decision, the young sergeant of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police at once acted. He rushed forward to
where, by the light from without, he saw the dislodged shutter lying
upon the cabin floor, caught it up, and, stooping so as not to let
his head show above the sill of the opening, dashed up under this
and clapped the shutter, still fairly serviceable and intact, save
for its lack of fastenings, over the aperture.

As he thus closed this several bullets rattled on the outside of the
shutter, almost knocking it out of his hands. But he kept it pressed
tightly over the opening with one hand, and turned and shouted to
Old Alf:

“You run and help Abner in the other cabin, Mr. Arnold. I can manage
here.”

He knocked up the hook which held the slide over the loop or slit in
the shutter, with his pistol muzzle, while he kept the shutter
pressed over the open window with his left hand. Then he pushed
aside the slide and thrust the weapon out, peering forth at the same
time.

There came a loud shout of alarm from Abner, and Old Man Arnold,
wheeling, rushed back to the other cabin.

“They’ve cut us loose, father--Amos!” Abner bawled.

A redskin’s knife or tomahawk had slashed through the solitary
mooring-rope holding his end of the scow to the “castle” verandah,
and the craft began to drift on the current towards the southern
side of the “dock,” or palisaded enclosure.

It was no easy task Sergeant Dick had set himself--to hold up the
heavy steel shutter over the window, and at the same time fire out
through the loophole in it.

All the windows aboard the ark were constructed alike. They were
merely square casements, and in the ordinary way they would be left
open for light or air. The shutters--solid plates of steel an inch
or more in thickness--were fitted in grooves, which rose above them,
and could be dropped down easily over them on the inside and hooked
into position thus.

Howling Wolf had, of course, beaten the steel plate bodily out of
its grooves, and burst the hook away--no light achievement in the
circumstances.

Old Man Arnold had kept that quarter of the scow free of boarders,
but now, on the closing of the open window, which all the Indians in
the canoes opposite had been making their target, several redskins,
swimming alongside, attempted again to board.

The two canoes within the “dock” at the same time closed up and
ranged alongside on that same quarter, and every warrior in them at
once stood up and gripped the side of the scow, making to draw
himself up and over into it.

But in this intention the majority of them were frustrated by the
sudden and by them, as well as by the defenders, the unexpected
release of the scow. This, borne upon by the current as it was,
ceased merely turning or veering round as if pivoted at its bow, and
instead began to move away sidelong, bodily.

How it happened the occupants of the canoes themselves hardly had
time to comprehend, but their dangling feet helped no doubt in the
catastrophe which followed. For coming in contact with the offside
gunwales of their frail craft, they helped to kick these under water
as the inside gunwales rose up with the scow pressing hard upon
them.

In an instant both canoes had filled and sunk, leaving half their
late occupants clinging to the scow, and the other half struggling
in the water, into which they had dropped either from fright or for
lack of a secure hold on the bulwark over them.




CHAPTER XII--SAVED BY A WOMAN’S WIT


Sergeant Dick’s automatic at once spoke rapidly; and, shot through
the brain, three of the would-be invaders fell back from the
bulwark, while the others, fearing the same fate, voluntarily let go
and likewise disappeared.

“Hooray!” shouted Amos. “We’ve done ’em yit again. Keep the shutter
up just a little longer, sergeant, and I’ll be able to help ye.”

He vacated his kneeling posture at the door, slamming and hooking
the slide over the loop in it, and turned and looked wildly about
the cabin for a means of fastening up the shutter. But his dull wits
could think of none on the spur of the moment.

“You’ll have to drop it and let it sweat, sergeant,” he said. “I
don’t see how we can manage it arter all. Look ahere, I’ll take the
loop beside it and guard it that way, and you can take the door
’stead o’ me. The women in the ‘castle’ will pick off all the red
varmints who try to board us on t’other side, you see.”

Sergeant Dick could not help smiling grimly at the young man
resigning the post at the door to him. It was far the more perilous
position if the window he was at had to be left unshuttered.

None of these young squatters commended himself very much to the
police officer. One and all, though fierce and plucky enough, he had
already had plenty of evidence, would prefer to save his own skin at
his (the sergeant’s) expense.

Without a word, however, John Dick at once dropped the shutter again
to the floor, and almost heaved a sigh of relief at being thus rid
of its most tiring weight.

Then he flitted to the door, and knelt by the loop Amos had just
left. Amos, however, redeemed himself somewhat now in the sergeant’s
eyes, for seeing from the loop his father had been so lately firing
through that that side of the craft was free of invaders or
boarders, he at once rushed across the cabin to the other, and
looked out on that side also.

“Hooray! Hooray, sergeant!” he yelled. “There’s not a redskin aboard
on either side. I can see from end to end of the scow, and there
can’t be none at t’other end of cabin neither. I should say, Abner
and the Old Man air firing at the skunks in the water. Ay, give it
to ’em hot, now, sergeant! Don’t spare the skunks. Put a bullet
through every head in sight. Thunder! What’s that blaze out in the
middle of the lake? Cuss it! It’s on Stable Islet! The skunks have
landed a party there an’ fired the stables with the ’osses inside.”

“No, they are carrying off the horses, I can see from here, on two
rafts they have evidently made from some of the timber of the
stables.”

“We’ll have to let ’em go; we can do nothing to purvent ’em. We’ve
got our hands full with the varmints round us. Let ’em have it,
sergeant! Wipe out all who are inside the dock! Hooray! They’re
done, and air all trying to get away now.”

It was true. From the upper loophole in the door, Dick could see all
the redmen in the enclosure before him swimming away desperately for
the palisades, or clambering over these into the canoes waiting
outside.

Such of the Indians as had remained in the canoes were firing
through the palisades at both the ark and the “castle,” to try to
cover the retreat. But both these structures were bullet-proof, and
the excitement, flurry, and exasperation of the red sharpshooters
militated against any likelihood of their getting a shot home
through the tiny slits of loopholes in the shutters.

Almost directly in front of him, the sergeant could see out upon the
lake two large rafts--made of beams and boards, and what had
evidently been partitions between stalls in the stable and the
buggy-house, as well as doors, bound roughly together with rawhide
lariats.

The rafts were beyond Stable Islet, and so beyond the radius of the
illumination of the blazing tar-barrel hung out by Muriel and Jenny.
But a huge bonfire, composed of the flaming remains of the looted
and half dismantled stable and buggy-house lit up another great
patch of the lake, and showed the two captured horses, one on either
raft, surrounded by several Indian warriors paddling and steering
for the western shore.

A couple of canoes were also towing each raft, which, therefore, for
all its clumsy make, moved fairly quickly over the lake.

[Illustration: A HUGE BONFIRE SHOWED THE TWO CAPTURED HORSES.]

Amos Arnold, sharp on his own last words, had thrust his Winchester
repeater through the loop he stood beside, and started vengefully to
take potshots at every plumed head bobbing upon the water before
him.

Sergeant Dick, however, held his fire. He did not believe in such
cruel butchery as that, retribution though it might be called.

“Let the misguided poor wretches go,” he cried. “They’ve had enough
of it. We’ve given them a drubbing--a thrashing they are not likely
to get over in a hurry.”

He was pleased to note that only one rifle seemed to be firing now
from the front or verandah side of the house, although three rifles
had been until the besiegers turned tail. The single rifle could
only belong to the fierce old wife and mother of this tigerish
family.

Muriel and Jenny had been firing out upon the assailants up to now,
but, seeing their foes fleeing, they too were humanely forbearing to
shoot.

“What’s that?” howled Amos. “Let the wretches go! Spare ’em ’cos
they’re runnin’. Not much! Not me!”

And he continued to pot away. But with indifferent success, for the
light from the blazing tar-barrel was getting very bad--very jumpy
and feeble. The barrel was falling to pieces and dropping in flaming
fragments with loud hisses into the water, or rebounding from and
sliding down the iron roof of the “castle.”

Moreover, the swimmers dived incessantly or swam under water until
they reached the palisades, where many of them managed to slip
through instead of having to climb over.

For all their vindictiveness, too, the squatter and his two sons saw
that the current was carrying the ark against the southern end of
the enclosure, and comprehended the peril of allowing this to
happen. Partly screened from the fire of those within the ark by the
palisades, the redmen outside these would easily be able to board,
if it drifted alongside them. The little craft would be bound to be
taken. The Indians, by mounting on the palisades, would be able to
leap aboard in overwhelming numbers, get on the roof where they
could not be reached, and break through with their tomahawks.

“Quick!” shouted Sergeant Dick, on noting the danger simultaneously
with the other three. “We shall drift against the palisades if we
are not careful, and then it will be all up with us. Quick! The
other door! We must get out at all risks and use the sweeps, or we
are done for.”

As one man, the four defenders of the ark rushed to the door by
which they had entered its “house”--which door was still the nearer
to the “castle,” and now almost directly facing it.

Frenziedly the whole quartet flung themselves upon the bolts and
bars. One wrenched back the top bolt; another the bottom. Another
turned the key, and the fourth whipped out the top great wooden bar.
Then the other two bars were removed in like haste and the door was
thrown open.

Out into that end of the scow the four men burst, and seized upon
the two big oars or “sweeps” lying to either side. The cabin
screened them from their nearest foes--those lining the palisading
at the point whither they were drifting. But they were wholly
exposed, save when they stooped double, to the Indians on either
side of them, and in order to use the “sweeps,” they would have to
expose themselves. Not only that. They were now so close up to the
palisading that they might not be able to overcome the inertia of
their craft, plus the resistance of the current, which was dead
against them, in time to avert the threatened calamity.

Woman’s wit proved their salvation. But for it they must assuredly
have, all four, fallen victims to the fury of the already exulting
savages waiting for them. Using the sweeps, they would not have been
able to get back inside the “house” or cabin, and shut out their
foes before these were upon them, once they touched the palisades.

A rope came sailing through the air from the direction of the
“castle.” It fell across both bulwarks of the scow, and in an
instant all four inmates of this had sprung upon it and grabbed it.

As they did so a storm of bullets “criss-crossed” through the space
they had just been occupying. The Indians on the broken arc of
palisading in sight of them had opened a cross fire upon them. The
air above them, as they crouched on all fours, grasping the
rope--below the bulwarks of the scow--was alive with lead flying in
different directions.

To stand upright again would have meant instant annihilation, for
the range was not twenty feet.

“Back inside the cabin! Crawl on your hands and knees. We can haul
on the rope through the doorway!” cried Sergeant Dick.

The four men scrambled madly back inside the open door behind them,
holding tightly, all, to the rope which was pulled hard against
them. It was an experience none of them would wish to go through a
second time.

The leaden storm over their heads never abated for a moment, but
whistled past, thudded against the bulkhead, whizzed in at the open
door of the cabin or came smashing through the sides of the scow,
incessantly.

But once inside the cabin door, they pushed this three quarters to,
and, standing behind it, heaved their hardest, in concert, on the
rope, which they passed around the foot of the mast in the middle of
the compartment.

As the rope had come sailing through the air towards them, one and
all had seen that it emanated from the “castle” window nearest them,
looking out onto the verandah.

Muriel Arnold had seen their imminent deadly peril, and with a
woman’s quick wit had realized that only a rope thrown them from the
“castle” could save them.

“Aaron! Abel!” she had screamed to her two married cousins. “Quick,
here! Quick! Drop everything and come quick!”

The two brothers came tearing from their respective posts and found
her gripping a coil of rope. She then thrust the rope into the
eldest brother, Abel’s, hands, threw up the shutter within the
embrasure of the window, and hurriedly explained that he must toss
the rope to his father and two brothers on the ark.

An adept at throwing the lasso, it was the easiest thing in the
world for Abel Arnold to send the rope sailing out through the open
window into the near end of the scow. And the moment he and Aaron
felt it tugged upon, they began to haul with all their might upon
it, aided by their mother, Muriel, and Jenny, overcoming the “way”
on the craft, and drawing it back towards the verandah.




CHAPTER XIII--SERGEANT DICK’S DETERMINATION


The Indians howled with baffled fury and concentrated their fire
upon the open window of the “castle.” Several of their bullets
actually frayed the rope, while others entered the open window.

But Abel and Aaron’s wives rushed in, and, from the other,
shuttered, windows looking on to the verandah, opened a dropping
fire upon the discomforted redmen. In less time almost than it takes
to tell it, the near end of the ark bumped against the verandah, and
the craft was safe.

Hurriedly making fast the rope in the “castle” and the ark, the
occupants of both were able to man their loopholes again in full
strength. They fired into the besiegers with such effect that these
saw the hopelessness of continuing the struggle and broke and
paddled away for dear life out of the radius of the light.

“We’ll have our horses back. If we are sharp we can manage it,”
roared the squatter inside the ark. “Quick! Amos, Abner, sergeant,
let us get up the sail.”

“No, no, uncle, you’ll be captured--you’ll all go to your certain
capture or death!” screamed Muriel, inside the “castle.”

“Not us!” cried Amos. “The Injins air all running like sheep. We’ll
chase ’em. The burnin’ stable will give us all the light we need.”

“It would be the height of folly, squatter,” said Sergeant Dick
quietly. “Out in the open lake and darkness the canoes would be
buzzing round you immediately, like wasps around a jampot. Besides,
do you think for a moment the Indians would let you recover the
horses _alive_? No, they would cut the animals’ throats if they had
to abandon them. And, look at the distance the rafts are from us,
and how near to the shore. We couldn’t possibly do it, fast as I
know the scow sails, with the delay in opening and warping out
through your dock-gate.”

“You hold your tongue until you are asked for your advice, me bold
policeman,” snarled Abner.

“All the same it would be downright, dod-rotted madness, Alf, and
you’ll do no such thing!” bawled the squatter’s wife. “Let the
’osses go. They’re not wu’th my brave lads’ lives, if you don’t
vally your own. Ain’t you got the sense to know when to come in out
of the rain?”

That settled it.

Old Man Arnold grinned a little sheepishly at Sergeant Dick, then
faced sharply upon his son Abner.

“You hold _your_ tongue, me lad, and l’arn a little more respec’ for
a man who’s proved hisself to be a man all through this ’ere night.
Never you mind him, sergeant. He allus had a spiteful tongue. Don’t
know why ’zactly. Didn’t get it from me, anyways, though he mout
from the old ’ooman.”

The redmen were now in full retreat on all sides, and the majority
of them were already swallowed up in the inky shadows surrounding
the circle of light still feebly cast by the almost burnt-out
tar-barrel.

Without fear of being shot at, therefore, Sergeant Dick, the
squatter, and Amos and Abner emerged from the open door of the ark,
and followed each other on to the verandah of the “castle,” to the
accompaniment of sounds of the door of this being hastily unbarred
and unbolted.

Jenny was the first to rush forth, and greet her father and
brothers. She threw herself, sobbing and laughing together
hysterically, into the old man’s arms, while her cousin Muriel
advanced to the young police officer, and said:

“Sergeant, on behalf of my uncle and aunt and cousins, as well as
myself, I thank you sincerely for the excellent help you gave us. I
am sure we are all very grateful to you.”

“What did he do more’n the rest of us?” asked Abner. “Wasn’t it for
his own life as much as yourn or anybody else’s, he was fightin’. He
on’y done wot we all done, and had to do.”

“You are ungenerous, Abner. At least have the decency to hold your
tongue if you can’t be grateful for the excellent service our guest
rendered us, and remember that he is our guest.”

“Hoity-toity, gal! Can’t the lad speak in his own ’ome? Since when
did you put up to l’arn my sons manners?”

This from the aunt and mother.

“That’ll do--that’ll do, Kate! The gal was quite right, and Abner’s
an ungrateful young pup as wants l’arnin’ different. Come, let’s git
indoors. Mother, and you, gals, put the pot on, and let’s have
somethink to eat, and give us somethink to drink while it’s
a-cookin’. I’m that thirsty I could nigh drink the lake dry, and you
must be the same, sergeant.”

Dick admitted that he was dry, but said that a glass of water would
serve him. Whereupon Muriel at once rushed off and brought him one,
to the scowling and muttered resentment of Abner.

The old woman promptly put a big pot on an oilstove, and Muriel and
she proceeded to lay the table, while her husband and sons, throwing
themselves into chairs, were served with tin mugs of whisky by Jenny
and the two daughters-in-law, Bella and Deborah.

Occasionally one of the young men would rise and look out through a
loophole in front or at the side, to see that all was well without;
and while they drank and filled and smoked their pipes, they agreed
that it was most unlikely that the rebellious Indians would renew
the attack upon them.

“They’ve had their bellyful of fightin’ with us, there’s no doubt
aboot that,” guffawed Abel, the eldest brother. “They’ve gone off
right enough; they’ll not show up here again in a ’urry, though I
’spects they’ll carry on their devilish games elsewheres--range all
over the country, raisin’ Cain. But that don’t matter a red cent to
us s’long as they leaves us alone.”

“It matters a lot to me, though,” said Sergeant Dick. “As one of the
custodians of law and order in the country, my duty demands that I
delay no longer here, but hurry at once back to the nearest
police-station, an’ put myself at the disposal of my
superiors--assist them in whatever measure they see fit to take to
cope with this revolt.”

“You must stay the night with us, sergeant,” said the old squatter.
“Don’t go and say later on as ’ow we druv you away. You mustn’t take
no heed of that surly young pup, Abner, there.”

“No, I don’t think I ought to wait until morning. It makes my blood
run cold when I think of the atrocities these rebel braves may be
guilty of all over the defenseless country while I am snug and safe
here. I couldn’t sleep comfortably in my bed, Mr. Arnold. My plain
duty is to get away back to my fellow-troopers, and help in checking
these redskin raiders--putting a stop to their wild work. And so you
must really excuse me for apparently running away from you and not
availing myself of your kind invitation. I will partake of your
hospitality, however, so far as to remain until after supper, for I
am just about famished, and it’s no use starting out on the
back-trail faint with hunger. But, after that, I will trouble one or
more of your sons”--he purposely did not look at Abner--“to put me
ashore somewhere, on the north shore preferably, when I will make
the best of my way on shank’s pony to Lonewater, the nearest of our
stations about here, I believe.”

“Please yourself, sergeant,” responded the old man, “but, harkee!
You needn’t go on foot. There’s an old fellow lives wi’ his wife,
and no ’un else, back of the cliffs wot the echo comes from on this
lake. You heerd the echo, no doubt?”

“I did.”

“Waal, this old chap--name of Seymour--is an old shepherd on the big
sheep ranch that stretches for miles on miles t’other side of them
cliffs--the Lonewater Ranch it’s known as; and he keeps a couple of
horses allus for gallopin’ round looking arter stray sheep, and if
you tells him or his missus you comes from me they’ll let you have
one of the nags ’ithout a word.”

He was frowning in a strange, deprecatory way at his four sons, who
had all looked quickly and suspiciously at him and one another when
he first mentioned about the shepherd.

Abel, Aaron, and Amos nodded back at him, plainly reassured. But
Abner shrugged a shoulder and turned away, the gesture signifying,
as plain as plain could be, in the vernacular of the country, “Oh,
the old man’s fair dotty, and, as for me, I give him up as
hopeless.”

Sergeant Dick did not fail to notice these strange looks and signs
passing between the father and sons. It was his business to be
observant, to keep his eyes about him and notice such little things.
But he could not understand the meaning of them, the reason for
them, and was considerably puzzled.

He feigned, however, not to notice anything, to be absorbed in the
contemplation of the glass of milk which Muriel had insisted on his
having.

He was to wonder afterwards why he was not sharper--why he did not
tumble to the significance of this wireless telegraphy.

“Oh, thank you!” he said. “I shall be glad if you will direct me to
this Seymour’s cabin. But possibly the poor old man and his wife
have fallen victims to the Indians’ fury. The fiends are bound to
scour the country all round, and murder every living soul they come
across.”

“They’ll not get hold of old Bill Seymour or his missus. You can lay
to that.”

Again his sons frowned and shook their heads at him, and he frowned
back at them in a way that clearly meant, “Mind your own business,
lads. I know what I’m doing.”

“I don’t mind a-tellin’ _you_, sergeant, that he’s had his cabin
burnt over the heads of his missus and hisself afore now by
redskins, and bad whites, an’ nary a ’air of either of ’em has been
singed. And for why? Waal, as I said I don’t mind a-tellin’ _you_,
but it mustn’t go no further, mind. Acause the cabin’s abuilt close
by the cliffs, not thirty yards from ’em, and he and his missus hev
a hunderground passage that they dug out a-runnin’ from th’ ’ut to a
hidden cave in the rocks--a cave that the redmen wouldn’t find if
they s’arched for donkeys’ years.”

His sons on this, exchanged nods that implied, like Abner’s shrug,
that their father was clean crazy thus to give away Seymour’s
secret. Aaron jumped up quickly and noisily, and shouted, clearly in
order to put a stop to the old man’s confidences:

“Come on, mother, Deb, Bella, Muriel, Jenny! What are you all so
long about? Let’s have something to eat for goodness’ sake. I’m just
starved. Hurry up, do!”




CHAPTER XIV--THE AMBUSH


Thus exhorted, the women, with many protests that they had been
getting the supper ready as quickly as they could, set an appetizing
stew on the table and all eleven of them sat round and fell to, with
exceeding relish after their late terrible fight for life.

As before, one or other of the party from time to time rose during
the meal, and looked out upon the lake to guard against any surprise
attack by some of their late besiegers. Sergeant Dick sat between
Muriel and Jenny, and was scowled at the whole time by Abner, who
sat opposite him.

The two girls did their best to dissuade the sergeant from starting
out before daylight, when, as they said, he might be able by a
little reconnoitering, to learn whether the Indians were still in
the neighborhood and likely to intercept him.

“And if they were,” he answered, “I should then be stuck here until
nightfall again; it would be hopeless to think of getting away. But,
if I slip off now, I have everything in my favor, and should be able
to get ashore safely and reach Seymour’s cabin before daybreak.”

All the men and the other women agreed with him; and, at his
request, old Alf Arnold, exchanging again sundry mysterious winks
and nods with not only his sons, but his wife and daughters-in-law
as well, proceeded to give him minute instructions how he would get
to the shepherd Bill Seymour’s lonely dwelling.

And then, the meal being at an end, Dick asked which of the young
men would put him ashore in a canoe.

“Oh, we’ll take you ashore in the ark, sergeant--me and three of the
lads--you, Aaron, Amos, and Abner. Abel, you and the women ought to
be able to hold the ‘castle’ until our return, although I doan’t for
a minute think as ’ow it’s likely to be attacked ag’in, or us
either, for that matter. So get ready you three, Aaron, Amos, Abner!
Buckle on your cartridge belts ag’in and let’s be moving, for I can
see the sergeant wants to be off.”

John Dick offered his hand to each of the women in succession, and
he could not help noticing what flabby handshakes all save Muriel
and Jenny gave him.

“Good-by! I hope to see you all again soon, under better
circumstances,” he said, as he followed the squatter and his three
sons out the door on to the verandah.

It was quite dark outside now. The tar-barrel had long since burnt
itself out, as had also the stable and buggy-shed on Stable Islet;
and the light had been extinguished in the front or living-room of
the “castle,” so that any watchful eyes on the shores of the lake
might not see the door open, and what was ado.

As all the adieux had been said inside the house, the five men did
not linger on the verandah, but ran at once to the near end of the
ark and sprang aboard.

Old Alf unlocked the cabin door in case of a sudden necessary
retreat. Then while Abel, inside the “castle,” cast off the
mooring-rope secured through the window, Abner hauled it in, and
Aaron, Amos, and Sergeant Dick hoisted the sail on the mast, and got
out two long sweeps as well.

As silently as possible the scow was worked towards the dock-gate,
which was found considerably the worse for the siege.

One of the padlocks was smashed, and the other so battered that the
key would hardly fit the lock, while the stout oaken beams and pales
were all hacked and chipped from the free use of Indian tomahawks.

Unfastening and opening the gate, they warped the ark out. Then
Arnold _pater_ secured the gate again and, spreading their sail
fully to what breeze there was, they shipped their sweeps and stood
silently away round the east side of the “castle,” so as to deceive
any Indian eyes that might have them under observation.

They made as if for the landing-spit on the east side for a short
distance, then tacked and steered northward up the lake, and, when
they were approaching the narrow curving neck there, they shifted
sail again and headed at top speed for the western shore.

By this erratic course they hoped to deceive and leave behind any
Indian canoes that might be out on the lake spying about.

It yet wanted a good two hours to daylight, as they backed in slowly
to the western bank, and gently grounded their broad stern on a
little jutting point similar to the landing-place on the opposite
bank.

All was still save for the low murmuring of the trees in the night
breeze, and an occasional ripple of the placidly lapping water
against the bank and the sides of the scow. The trees were very
dense at the point, the same as everywhere else round the lake, and
in the darkness they seemed to present an impenetrable wall.

But as Old Alf had explained to the sergeant of mounted police, a
trail of blazed trees, which would show up white and thus be plainly
visible even on so dark a night, led right from the point to the
foot of the high cliffs behind the woods. On reaching the cliffs all
he had to do was to skirt their base northward, turn with them and
follow them round, and he could not miss Seymour’s hut on their
farther side.

“Well, good-by, sergeant, I ’opes as ’ow you’ve enjoyed yourself
while you’ve bin ’ere,” said Old Alf, in grim humor, as he shook
Dick’s hand. “Now, your trail’s as cl’ar as daylight, and ye’ll only
hev yourself to blame if you go astray.”

“He can’t go astray nohow, onless he doan’t know his right ’and from
his left,” growled Aaron. “So long, sergeant! Don’t forgit to give
us a call next time you are in these parts.”

“Ay, don’t fail to drop in next time you’re passin’ the lake,”
grinned Amos, cracking an old chestnut which had done hoary service
in the family since one of their early visitors first cracked it.

Abner was not present. He had purposely kept to the other end of the
scow.

Sergeant Dick pressed the hands of the three men again, and sprang
lightly ashore. He turned and waved his hand, then plunged into the
bushes out of sight--to be seized suddenly by the throat with a
strangling grip by a dark form which appeared to spring out of the
ground itself!

At the same time his arms were pinned to his sides by other shadowy,
plume-bedecked forms.

Sergeant Dick was unable to utter a cry with that choking grip upon
his throat, and he was powerless to wrench his arms free. But he had
been in many a similar predicament before--in drinking saloons and
other wild places into which his profession took him in chase of the
malefactor, or the maintenance of law and order--and he had learned
certain tricks of defense even when taken at such a disadvantage.

Quick as thought he jerked up his right knee with all his strength.
It came in contact with something soft and yielding--the chest of
the man gripping him by the throat of course.

There was a gasp, and the Indian relaxed his grip upon his windpipe.

Immediately he sent up a ringing warning shout to the occupants of
the ark.

“Help! Redskins!”

At the same time he ducked his head and drove it forward at the
winded savage’s face, while wrenching with all his strength to free
his arms, and curling one of his legs round in a sweeping motion
sideways and backwards.

His maneuvers were highly successful. In fully a dozen cases he had
found them work just as well before.

The winded savage was sent flying headlong backwards against a tree
with his nose nearly flattened by the top of the white captive’s
head; and another redman, with legs scooped clean from under him,
went down sidelong, amongst the bushes on the brave young police
officer’s right hand.

With that hand thus released, Sergeant Dick promptly drove it into
the chest of the Indian, pinning his left hand. And as the man
staggered back, tripping over the bushes and nearly falling, the
thicket rang to the piercing war-whoop of the Indians, and became
alive with madly rushing, be-plumed shadows.

Two of these aimed fierce blows at Sergeant Dick’s head, but,
luckily for him, in striking down the Indian on his left, he had
slipped upon a fallen twig. He fell heavily upon the broad of his
back, and the tomahawks of the two fresh assailants missed him.

One of the pair, indeed, fell over him, and the second man,
satisfied that he could not escape with his late captors also to
reckon with, ran on after the others towards the ark.

There came the sharp popping of revolvers from that craft, and
several screams of agony intermingled with the Indian whooping.

Old Alf Arnold and his sons were not taken unawares. They had caught
the alarm from Sergeant Dick’s devoted shout, and instantly wheeled
about and dropped, crouching upon one knee in the stern, in the act
of pushing the craft off the point.

All three had their holster flaps open, so that they might whip out
their automatics instantly. In fact, as they had approached the
shore every man had his pistol ready cocked in his hand.

Partly screened, in their kneeling attitudes, by the high sloping
stern and sides of the scow, they met the onrush of the Indians with
a fusillade which quickly checked it.

Old Alf, Aaron and Amos were in the stern, as already stated. Abner
was in the bows with the long, double-roomed cabin between him and
them.

He was out of the fight so to speak, but, a quick glance round the
side of the “house” or cabin showed him the forms of his father and
brothers firing at the redskins ashore, and hurriedly he grabbed a
rope that came in over the bow and was attached to an anchor some
little way out in the lake.

He heaved upon this rope quickly, hand over hand, with all his
might, and drew the light, easily moved ark, swiftly through the
water away from the shore.

This was another of the many “wrinkles” or ideas that Old Alf Arnold
had taken from the famous American author, Fenimore Cooper’s story,
“The Deerslayer.” Like “Floating Tom Hutter” in that novel, Arnold
and his sons always dropped an anchor well away from the shore of
the lake when about to land from the ark, and paid out the rope. By
hauling on the rope a prompt retreat, if necessary, from the shore
could always be easily effected.




CHAPTER XV--LOST IN THE WOODS


Even as Sergeant Dick went down under the redskin armed with the
tomahawk, he had whipped out his revolver and retained a firm grip
of the butt.

His antagonist aimed a furious stroke at his head, but the blow
missed through his falling, and the keen blade only bit deep into
the mold beside his left ear.

Swift as thought the young police officer clapped the revolver to
the broad, naked, painted chest lying over him and pressed the
trigger.

The crack of the weapon was instantaneously followed by the
death-shriek of the foeman, who rolled limply off him, and lay
spread-eagled, face upward, upon the ground alongside.

John Dick was on his knees in a flash, pointing the revolver at the
Indian whom he had only sent staggering on his left hand, and who
was now rushing at him with clubbed rifle.

A swift stab of flame, accompanied by the whip-like report, and the
redman crumpled up in his tracks, and tumbled on top of his dead
companion.

Only one more enemy in sight remained to be dealt with--the man on
the right, whom Sergeant Dick had tripped up. The fourth savage, the
one in front of him, was still _hors de combat_--too winded and
stunned to take a hand in the fight as yet.

A shot through the brain ended the life of the third man, while in
the act of sighting at him with a rifle. Then the sergeant scrambled
upright, and looked wildly about him, with smoking revolver ready to
pot at the first fresh assailant he saw.

He meant to rush back to the aid of those in the scow, feeling that
to do so was his duty--that he could not consider his own safety and
leave them to be butchered possibly.

But in the same instant, through an opening in the trees before him,
he saw the ark some fifteen feet away from the bank. The craft was
slipping swiftly out towards the middle of the lake, with three dark
figures in the stern--almost indistinguishable from the background
of the cabin--spitting fire rapidly, evidently with automatics, at a
howling pack of plumed forms waist-high, and deeper, in the water.

The squatter and his sons were safe, and there was no hope of his
rejoining them. He must consult his own safety by immediate and
headlong flight in the opposite direction.

Wheeling promptly, therefore, Sergeant Dick fled away through the
timber, and only in the nick of time. Half a dozen braves, alarmed
by the shooting and death-shrieks of their comrades in the rear,
were rushing back to learn the cause.

They just caught sight of his vanishing red coat, and with yells of
rage sent a hasty, scattered volley after him, ere starting in hot
and furious pursuit.

One of the bullets went through the skirts of his red tunic, but all
the other messengers of death only smacked against the trees behind
or around him, or went swishing, equally as harmlessly, through the
bushes.

Sergeant Dick ran as he probably never ran before in his life. He
could not pick his way in the intense darkness of the woods, nor had
he time or the inclination to do so.

He just hurled himself bodily at the thick, high-growing bushes,
burst through them anyhow, leaving fragments of his garments
attaching to them, and sustaining pricks and scratches all over his
body and legs, even through his clothing.

He protected his face with his hands and rifle held up before him,
and his keen eyes were just able to discern the trunks of the
trees--a blacker black than the darkness itself.

Guided by the crashing he thus unavoidably made, the Indians
followed hard on his heels, uttering the most blood-curdling
war-whoops and threats of vengeance, occasionally firing in the
direction of the sounds ahead of them.

They were so close upon him he could hear what they threatened to do
to him quite plainly in the otherwise still night air; and he did
not need any better incentive to try and increase the distance
between them.

Presently the dense, tangled undergrowth came to an end. Such is
generally found only on the outskirts of colonial forests.

In the deeper depths there is hardly any, and the great boles of the
trees stand up nakedly like so many mighty poles stuck in the
ground, often rising to an immense height before a single branch
juts out.

Now his boots made next to no noise on the soft pine-needles, and he
flitted as noiselessly as a shadow through the thick-growing trees
and the darkness. Even though running at top speed, he trod with the
caution and silence he had learnt to do on many a trail farther
north--the stealth his like and all backswoodsmen have picked up
from the redmen themselves.

Here, therefore, his pursuers were at fault--could not longer follow
him by the sounds he made; and so they halted to make torches of the
pine wood around, with which to try and follow his tracks.

This was so much loss of time, which the quarry made good use of in
covering ground; and very shortly he came to some hard and rocky
ground on which his feet would leave no impression.

The trees here were fewer, but the night was so dark he felt he
might safely trust to its screen, and he ran forward at increased
speed, still as softly as possible, the ground all the time rising
under his feet and growing more rugged and difficult.

He stumbled suddenly down a deep water-course, which he did not
discover until he was over its edge.

It ran at right angles to the way he was making. But as he had
already lost all sense of locality, knew not in which
direction--north, east, west or south--that he was making, he
decided at once to keep to the stream and walk up it.

To go down it, he knew would take him back to the lake, for no doubt
the stream ran into the lake.

He wanted to put as wide a distance between himself and the lake as
he could before daylight, and run no risk of capture by the redmen.

If he had no longer any real idea as to where he was, he had also
lost all trace of his pursuers, left them far in the rear; and he
could breathe more freely and take things more quietly.

The stream did not reach to his knees, and so his service boots kept
him dry. But it was running very fast, its rocky bed rising steadily
in a steep incline.

Soon he came to where the water boiled and frothed and roared in a
great cauldron-like basin, above which was a positive slide of
water, the stream pouring down a smoothly-worn slope of rock at
something like thirty degrees.

Sergeant Dick could not see the top of this slope or slide of water
with the darkness, and the fact that the banks were shut in by trees
which completely over-arched it.

The banks themselves, too, were high and rocky, in places beetling.
Just beside him they overhung the water to a height of twenty feet
or more.

“I’ve come to the cliffs of the Wonderful Echo, that’s evident,” he
murmured; “but it would be madness to try and follow them to the
right now. Besides I’d have a job just here I should say, and I’m
dead beat--just about done up. And for another thing, I might only
blunder into the arms of the redskins I have escaped from. Better
stay where I am until the morning’s light, anyway. ‘Go farther and
fare worse’ is an old saying I believe in. Still, I can’t stay here
exactly. I’ll have to go back a bit and scale the bank.”

He did so, and climbed out where the ground was easy. Then,
satisfied that he had thrown off all pursuit, he hunted about him
among the rocks for some sort of a niche or cave into which he might
crawl, and so be safe, while he slept, from any prowling bear or
equally to be dreaded bull-moose.

By the greatest good fortune, he came across a kind of grot formed
by two mighty, tabular-shaped fragments of rock having been thrown
up against each other at some time in the world’s history. A
triangular shaped archway ran between the two rocks, and strewn all
round in front of it were a number of fair-sized boulders, some as
much as he could roll along, others smaller.

“Eureka! The very thing,” he crowed jubilantly at sight of the
place, “it might have been made for me.”

He crawled inside the archway, and found that it went back for about
twenty feet, then narrowed so much that nothing bigger than a rat
could possibly get in at that end.

Delighted beyond measure, he returned to the entrance, and, rolling
some of the heavier stones in front of it, made himself a bed of dry
leaves and brushwood within it.

He piled more stones on top of his barricade, and then, with his
rifle and revolver beside him, stretched himself comfortably on his
litter and composed himself for sleep.

Dead tired as he was, hardly able indeed within the past quarter of
an hour or so to keep his eyes open or prevent himself sinking
exhausted to the ground, he was immediately in the land of
dreams--slumbering heavily and soundly.

When he opened his eyes again, he lay for some minutes in a pleasant
half doze, unable to realize fully, and, in fact, careless of, where
he was, too comfortable to move.

And then gradually, as his wits came together, he became conscious
of a bright reddish golden glow surrounding him.

He opened his eyes again, saw the slanting rocks above, and
comprehended where he was, and that the reddish light filling the
cave must come from the sun _setting again in the west_.

“Great Scott!” he exclaimed, as he pushed some of the stones of his
barricade over, and looked out for confirmation of his belief, “I
have slept the clock round nearly--been asleep, let me see, a good
sixteen hours at least.”




CHAPTER XVI--A STARTLING DISCOVERY


He crawled out of the cavity and looked about him.

Away to the southeast he could see the lake gleaming like a sheet of
molten fire in the rays of the setting sun. Between him and it, as
well as stretching all round as far as he could see, were
densely-wooded declivities backed by equally densely-wooded heights.

The view northward was cut off by a high ridge of splintered scaurs,
or cliff-like rocks, rising in terraces upon one another.

“H’m!” he said, “my way to Bill Seymour’s hut lies over those rocks,
or else round them to west or east. Across the ridge, due northward,
I should say, would be the quicker route, if it can be done; and I
haven’t too much time to spare if I would do it before darkness is
on me again. But how am I going to get up those cliffs?”

Piercing right through the ridge, he saw, was the tree-arched
water-slide. It cleft its way cleanly through all the rocky
terraces. From where he was standing close beside the water-course,
he could see the blue sky on the other side of the ridge through the
chasm or gorge it had carved or channeled for itself, probably
through countless ages.

“If I could get up the water-course against the stream,” he
muttered, “I should be past those unscalable cliffs anyway, and
possibly on a plateau which I might easily get across to the farther
side, where I want to go.”

He walked to the edge of the water-course, just where the first of
the terraced cliffs began and prevented him keeping on the bank
itself any longer.

A tree overhung the swift flowing current below. He climbed out on
to the branches as far as he could in safety--until they began to
dip and crack under him.

Parting the leaves around him, and craning his neck, he looked
up-stream. He saw that the slide went up--if such an expression may
be rightly used--about fifty more feet, overshadowed the whole way
by stunted trees clinging to the almost perpendicular sides of the
cleft.

It would be impossible to try to walk up the bed of the stream. The
slope was too acute, the power of the current would sweep his legs
from under him, and he would have absolutely nothing to drag himself
up by.

But there was nothing to prevent him clambering from tree to tree up
the cleft like a monkey, passing from one branch to another! The
trees all grew so close together and their branches were so
intertwined it would be easy enough.

He had his rifle slung upon his back. He slackened the sling
somewhat, and gave it a twist round his left arm near the shoulder
so as to guard against its being knocked off his back by a branch or
creeper entangling it. Then, making sure that his pistol-holster was
securely buttoned, he started on the gorilla-like feat.

It was, as he expected, the easiest task imaginable to swing himself
along and up, from branch to branch and tree to tree. He was quite
enjoying it, and telling himself laughingly that he was certainly
acting out the theory that men came from monkeys originally, when
his head rose above the top of the water-slide or sloped fall.

He could see over it and through the cleft in the gorge on to the
plateau beyond. And what he saw filled him, at first, with the
greatest astonishment, and then with supreme satisfaction.

The water-course continued on the level for only some ten feet; then
it swerved sharply to the right hand, and was a mountain torrent,
fed by several little rills around, tumbling from the greater
heights of the ridge in easy cascades.

Beyond where the stream curves round, the ground rose suddenly again
for a few yards, consisting of bare and fairly smooth rock; then it
fell away apparently like a precipice.

And across the wide valley, past this drop, on the gentle grassy
slopes of his opposite side, which rose considerably higher, _a
number of horses and cattle and sheep were peacefully grazing_!

“I must have reached Lonewater Ranch; be close to it,” Sergeant Dick
muttered, delightedly. “I must have traveled much farther than I
thought I had last night, and I’ve saved myself the trouble of
calling on Bill Seymour, the shepherd, and borrowing his horse.

“And yet--yet I can hardly credit that I’ve got so far--and I
understood Arnold to say that the ranch was northward--fifteen miles
or thereabouts northward of these cliffs. It can’t be Lonewater
after all that I have struck. But--but they did not mention any
other farm or ranch. In fact, they assured me there was no other
nearer than twenty miles.”

Puzzled beyond measure, therefore, he clambered on through the
remaining trees until he was over the verge of the slide, when he
swung himself down lightly and dropped into the bed of the stream.

In another minute he was standing on the rock at the edge of the
precipice, staring stupidly at what lay before him.

It was a great cup-like valley, completely enclosed by the high
circular ridge upon which he stood. There seemed to be no outlet
whatever to it, and the only sign of a human habitation that he
could see was a lean-to shed, or log-hut, built against the face of
a scaur or cliff just below on his left hand.

As he looked towards this hut, he discovered to his further surprise
that a zigzag track led down to it _from where he stood_.

He turned and looked about him in quest of where the path began, and
he saw that rude steps had been cut in the rocky escarpment beside
the cascading torrent on his right hand to the top of the ridge.

It was only on his side of the valley that the earth fell away
precipitously. The other three sides rose in the gentlest of slopes
to a greater height.

All over the great cup were scattered horses and cattle. There were
fully two hundred head of cattle, twice as many sheep, and some
fifty or sixty horses.

“Well, this is an enigma to me--a puzzling riddle if you like,” he
was murmuring, when, like light from heaven, came the startling
reading of the mystery, the true solution of the strange problem.

His eye had rested inadvertently--casually--upon the brands of three
of the sheep closest to him--just below near the hut. Their brands
were plainly visible in the rarefied mountain air, and--_they were
not the same; they were different_.

One was a circle with lines radiating from it all round--evidently
the sun in glory--with an eight-pointed star inside it.

Another was B.E. in a triangle, all three angles of which were cut
by a circle.

The third brand seemed much older and simpler than the other two,
and consisted merely of a triangle with P.F. within it.

“My Heaven!” gasped Sergeant Dick, recoiling a step under the shock.
“The place is plainly a cattle-thieves’ ‘duffing-yard’ or
ground--the secret place where they conceal the stolen cattle,
sheep, and horses, and change the brands on these before taking them
to some other part of the country and selling them.

“And--and there can be only one gang operating on such a scale as
this--the mysterious White Hood Bandits.”

The thought had no sooner occurred to him than he realized the
danger he was in, standing there exposed upon the ridge to any of
the desperate band who might be in the valley or on the cliffs
around.

Without a doubt the log-hut below was occupied by some of the gang.

It was fairly commodious, and would contain at least three
apartments. A stovepipe protruded from the sloping roof, but there
was no smoke issuing from it.

Sergeant Dick promptly whipped back into the cleft or little gorge
again, out of sight of any one who might possibly be in the valley.

Flattening himself against the rock, he hurriedly freed the flap of
his holster and drew his revolver, looking anxiously the while to
either side and behind him towards the water-slide.

No whistle or other alarming signal was heard.

He breathed more freely again, but with all his pulses throbbing
excitedly, he removed his Stetson hat from his head and unslung his
rifle from his back. Carrying the revolver and his hat together in
his left hand, his rifle in his right, he crawled back on his knees
to the edge of the precipice.

He close-hugged the side of the cleft as he went, and kept his eyes
ranging warily, searchingly, over the ridge down which the pathway
came.

Reaching the precipice again, he crouched behind a convenient
boulder close to its edge, peering cautiously round the rock, so as
only to show the side of his face and one eye. He surveyed the hut
again, closely.

“There can’t be any one at home!” he told himself presently, “or
else the gang deem themselves so secure as not to trouble about
keeping any watch. And really I don’t suppose any one but themselves
knows about this valley--has ever been inside it.

“There must be some other way they use for the ingress and egress of
the cattle. It is probably on the extreme west or northwest side of
the valley; the ridges seem rather tangled over there.

“Well, I can do nothing alone--single-handed. The gang are said to
number nine in full strength. I couldn’t possibly hope to tackle so
many at once. I’ll go back the way I came, and try in some way to
communicate with the Arnolds again. I shouldn’t be surprised that
the redskins have left the vicinity of the lake by this, realizing
the hard nut ‘Water Castle’ is to crack. The Arnolds, father and
sons, are five in number, and with myself would make six.

“If we crept up this water-slide in the dead of to-night or at dawn
to-morrow we ought to have all the advantages of a surprise, and
wipe out or round up the entire gang. If not all at once, well, in
two affrays--by lying in wait for the rest of the gang after
settling the batch we catch at home.”

With this design, he wriggled back to the edge of the water-slide
and, still keeping his chin on his shoulder and his eyes scanning
the ridges in sight, he climbed up into one of the trees overhanging
the water and began hurriedly to descend the side as he had ascended
it, that is, by clambering down from branch to branch and tree to
tree.

“Yes,” he said, half aloud to himself, when about halfway down,
“that brand ‘B.E.’ in a triangle, with a circle cutting the angles,
was undoubtedly originally ‘P.F.’ inside a triangle--was faked from
it.

“What could be simpler than to alter a ‘P’ into a ‘B,’ and an ‘F’
into an ‘E,’ and then stamp a circle over the triangle. ‘P.F.’ is
plainly the Pelson-Fellowes ranch brand--the next ranch, as Arnold
told me, to the Lonewater. And I shouldn’t be surprised that the
other brand I saw was Lonewater’s, faked or altered in some similar
way so as to render it unrecognizable.”

He was soon at the bottom of the water-slide again and then, with
the setting sun as his guide, he struck away down the mountain-side
and through the dense forest clothing it, due east.

Keeping on long after the sun had sunk to rest and it was night
again, he at length saw the lake gleaming faintly through the trees
ahead of him.




CHAPTER XVII--A SURPRISE, AND A RESCUE


In another minute Sergeant John Dick was standing on the western
shore of the lake, looking across its dark waters at a bright light
shining out in the middle of these, almost directly opposite him.

The light came, of course, from a window of “Water Castle.” It was
so small and ray-like that he knew it must be issuing from the open
loophole of a closed shutter.

He was considering whether it would be quite safe to fire the three
shots that Muriel Arnold had told him was the signal “want to come
off shore,” when suddenly a guttural voice spoke quite close to
him--a word or two in the Indian tongue.

Startled beyond measure, he faced in the direction of the sound, and
crouched down instinctively as he did so, pointing his revolver,
which he was already gripping in case of need, and breathing hard
and fast.

A light flared, and became a great blaze of dancing flame, amid the
loud crackling of burning brushwood. Some one had lit a bonfire--no
ordinary camp fire that--within a hundred feet or so of him!

The guttural Indian words told him that he had to deal with foes. He
thanked his stars that he had been prudent enough to approach the
lakeside with every caution of woodcraft.

Softly parting the bushes beside him, he craned his neck round a
tree which partly stood in the way, and saw that the fire had been
made in a fairly open space abutting right on the lakeside--a sort
of wide glade or avenue extending some thirty feet or more back from
the water’s edge.

The flames were shooting high into the air, lighting up the glade
and casting a ruddy glow out over the dark waters of the lake.

And in the lurid, flickering glare, Sergeant Dick saw a sight which
filled him with consternation.

Being set against three trees by a number of the rebellious redmen,
were Muriel Arnold, her uncle, and his son Amos, while just in
front, nearer the water’s edge that is, was poor half-witted Jenny
in the grip of several more hideously painted braves!

Near by, evidently directing operations, was a most truculent
looking athletic young sagamore or chief!

Some two score or more warriors stood, leaning on their rifles and
looking on, on the farther side of the glade.

Muriel and her uncle and cousin were being bound to the three trees,
with their faces towards the lake and the distant light in “Water
Castle.” The fire being slightly to one side of them would reveal
them plainly to anybody looking out of “Water Castle” on that side.

“Ugh! The white girl, beloved by Manito, and therefore sacred to all
true redmen, will now go in canoe to her home on the water, dat is
when I have fired my rifle to attract the attention of her friends.
She will then, on arriving at her home, say that all within ‘Water
Castle’ must come ashore in the ark and give themselves up, when we
will spare their lives and the lives of their friends here. But if
they do not agree to this--do not come ashore and surrender, then
they will see their friends here--that is the two white men, not the
beautiful white girl--put to the torture. The beautiful white girl,
the Lily o’ the Valley, she become my squaw. I have spoken--I,
Howling Wolf, the War Chief of the Ogalcrees.”

The Indian chief made this declaration in a slow, deliberate, and
dignified manner, with his rifle-butt resting on the ground, and the
weapon held in his left hand at arm’s length.

With the last word he caught up the piece, put it to his shoulder,
and, pointing it into the air and out over the lake, pulled the
trigger.

Sharp on the report, a flood of light streamed forth from the
southern side of “Water Castle”--its front really--displaying part
of the verandah. And then out on to this, in the glare of the light,
rushed in a body the rest of the squatter’s family--his wife, and
three other sons, and his two daughters-in-law.

The six stood as if transfixed, staring across the water at the
spectacle on the lakeside, which must have been plainly visible to
them.

It was too far for even a modern rifle to carry with effect, and the
light on both sides, of course, was of the poorest for such long
range. Moreover, the men and women on the verandah were partly
screened by the waist-high, boarded-in end of this.

“Put the child of the Manito in the canoe and let her depart with
the message of Howling Wolf,” said the chief, with a grim chuckle.

The North American Indians have always considered persons of feeble
intellect as under the direct protection of the Almighty--“Manito”
as they call Him--and therefore invariably treat them with respect,
and a reverence that is half-pity, half-awe. What a lesson for our
own much-vaunted civilization, where the half-witted are too often
regarded as fair butts for all manner of rough practical joking!

Jenny Arnold was led to the water’s edge, where Sergeant Dick now
saw a score and more canoes had been beached. His eye noted in the
same glance that some half-dozen of the canoes--farthermost from
him--which could not be drawn up on the limited strip of shelving
sand under the bank like the others, were floating, moored to trees
by their painters.

Jenny was put in the nearest canoe and given the paddles. Then three
of the Indians pushed the craft off, and she paddled away
frantically across the lake towards “Water Castle.”

Sergeant Dick racked his brains to think how he might effect a
rescue of the three prisoners. His heart was full of bitter grief
and anxiety as regarded the sweet girl before him, whom he now knew
he loved with all the strength of his deep-feeling, but not easily
moved, nature.

“I would sooner see her dead before me--kill her with my own hands
than that she should become the squaw of that villainous young
chief, Howling Wolf,” he reflected, his heart surcharged with
poignant rage. “He would treat her worse than his dog after awhile,
and her life would be a misery to her. I will deliver her and her
uncle and cousin, or share their fate. But how to effect my purpose?
That’s the question.”

He could think of no plan which at all held out a promise of
success, and he was still hopelessly regarding the scene in the
glade and ransacking his brains, when suddenly three spears of flame
darted from the thicket on the opposite side of the glade to him,
and the reports of as many rifle-shots rang out almost as one.

Howling Wolf had been standing, leaning on his rifle, and peering
out under his shading left hand after Jenny. He reeled, clapping his
left hand to the back of his feather-plumed head, and then crashed
heavily upon his side.

Two other redskins standing near, also fell and rolled over, then
lay still with feebly twitching limbs. And the forest aisles
promptly resounded with furious shouts of “Down with them! Give ’em
it, boys! Let ’em have it,” and the swift popping of revolvers.

But the redskins, though taken so completely by surprise, were quick
to note that they had apparently only three foemen to deal with.
Even as they broke and scattered for the nearest trees, they shouted
this to one another.

In a flash every redskin except the chief and some half-dozen others
who had been shot down by the first volley or by the quick
revolver-shots, had vanished behind a tree; and a brisk fusillade
now took place between the unseen trio in the thicket and the
Indians.

Only a few seconds, however, did the fusillade last--just while the
redmen were reassuring themselves that they had but three foes to
deal with. Then with a ringing war-whoop one of them burst from his
tree and ran, doubled up, and jumping from side to side towards the
surprisers’ place of concealment.

As one man the rest of the band followed him, yelling like so many
railway engines; and, to Sergeant Dick’s astonishment, Howling Wolf
bounded to his feet as if unhurt and raced after them, adding his
quota to the terrific whooping.

The three men in the bushes fled incontinently before that
overwhelming rush. The police officer could hear them tearing away
madly through the undergrowth without waiting to shoot back.

Quick as thought, he himself darted forward towards the open space.
He ran at full speed, and yet made hardly the slightest sound, on
account of his backwoods’ training, and with the firelight showing
him his path.

Into the glade he burst, just as two of the Indians lying there
showed symptoms of life and struggled into reclining postures.

Paying no heed to them, he flew to the prisoners, and hurriedly
began to slash through the ropes, which bound Amos, the nearest of
the trio. He used his clasp knife, which he had opened even as he
sprang into the glade; and the blade was as sharp as any razor.

As the cords parted, and Amos stood free in body and limb, Sergeant
Dick handed him his revolver, exclaiming:

[Illustration: HE FLEW TO THE PRISONERS, AND HURRIEDLY BEGAN TO SLASH
THRU THE ROPES.]

“Get one of the redskins’ knives, and free your father, while I free
Muriel. If you are quick we should get away in one of their canoes.”

Without a word, Amos grabbed the revolver, and, rushing to the
nearest dead Indian, snatched his scalping-knife from his belt, then
ran to liberate the old man; what time Sergeant Dick had sprung to
Muriel’s side, and was cutting the cords confining her wrists.




CHAPTER XVIII--BACK AT “WATER CASTLE”


“Courage! Courage, Miss Arnold! You know me. It’s all right. Keep
silent, and we’ll get away in safety.”

“Oh, thank Heaven--thank Heaven!” the girl breathed in tones of
ineffable relief, as he drew her free from the tree.

Something bright and shining whizzed past his head, and struck with
a loud thud against the tree.

It was a tomahawk, and it remained with the blade imbedded deep in
the tree-trunk, the haft quivering with the force with which it had
been thrown.

Simultaneously, a shrill, peculiar, ear-piercing cry rang out close
behind him. He wheeled--to see one of the wounded Ogalcrees
kneeling, bleeding like a stuck pig from a wound in the chest, and
still in the final attitude of hurling the hatchet at him.

The Indian made to catch up his rifle lying beside him. But, before
his fingers could close upon the weapon, there was a whiplike crack,
and he doubled up and fell forward, writhing, upon his face.

Amos had shot him with the revolver.

Sergeant Dick threw one arm quickly around Muriel to support her,
and, carrying his rifle “a-trail,” ran with her at full speed for
the nearest canoe. The police officer saw Amos finish freeing his
father in the same instant, and put a second well-aimed bullet from
the revolver through the head of the other wounded redskin, who was
weakly sighting at him with a rifle.

All four fugitives reached the canoes practically together, for Old
Alf and Amos got over the ground more quickly than Dick, hampered as
he was with the girl.

Amos brought up the rear, ready to fire the revolver again at the
first foeman to reappear.

Sergeant Dick hurriedly lifted Muriel in, then pushed the craft off
the sandy strip, retaining hold of it, however, so as to enable the
other two to get in.

“To the far end--to the bow, gal!” panted her uncle. And Muriel went
scrambling across the thwarts to the other extremity of the canoe.

Then with a curt “Thank ’ee, sergeant,” he leaped in, and scrambled
after her. Amos clambered in on the other side; and, throwing one
leg in, Dick thrust off well with the other.

Muriel and the old man had already caught up and dipped a paddle
apiece, and, propelled by their deft strokes, away the canoe shot
across the lake, just as there came a furious howl ashore, and loud
tramping of the bushes.

Amos promptly shot with the revolver, twice in rapid succession, at
the dark, plumed figures he saw amongst the trees, and the sergeant
swung his rifle to his shoulder, and sighted it, but forbore to
press the trigger.

“Fire--fire into them. Why don’t you?” screamed Amos.

His question was drowned by the noise of the discharge of the police
officer’s piece a fraction of a second before that of one of their
enraged foes on the bank.

Dick, who could see as well in the dark as any man--a matter of
practice always--had noted an Ogalcree about to shoot at them, and
had promptly anticipated the man.

He was not in time to prevent the shot being fired, but his bullet
pierced the Indian’s brain even as the trigger was pressed, with the
result that the hostile bullet flew wide of them.

Such deadly accuracy checked the ardor of the rest of the three or
four braves in the view of the fugitives. One hurriedly took shelter
behind a tree, and potted at the fleeing craft, while the others
rushed to launch more canoes and follow in pursuit.

Both Amos and Sergeant Dick, however, banged away wildly in the
direction of the solitary marksman to distract his aim. The
first-mentioned fired off the two remaining cartridges in the
revolver, and then, catching up a paddle, assisted in propelling the
canoe.

Light as a feather, and with next to no draught of water, it skimmed
along swiftly. It was speedily out of reach of the firelight in the
glade, and hidden by the dense shadows of the night from the
marksman on the bank.

The three paddlers, however, did not relax their exertions. They
still paddled desperately on, and the sergeant now laid down his
rifle, no longer of any use, and likewise took up a paddle, and
plied it.

“We all three owe you our lives, sergeant,” growled Old Man Arnold.
“You and the boys planned it well, and no error. You couldn’t hev
arranged it neater, nohow. But I do hope as ’ow the lads hev got
cl’ar as well, I much bedoubt that they hev. And yet if they hadn’t
a-gotten cl’ar we’d hev surely heerd the riptiles acrowin’ and
hooraying like, don’t ye think?”

“Yus, that’s so,” said Amos. “They’ve got cl’ar right enough, or
we’d ha’ heerd the painted demons a-screechin’ with joy. Strange,
though, none of the riptiles seem to be coming off arter _us_. How’s
that?”

“I should say the sergeant’s straight shooting is the deterrent,”
said Muriel, who spoke considerably better than her uncle and
cousins.

“H’m! P’raps,” growled her cousin, “but I don’t hear the ark
neither--nor see anythink of her.”

“You can hardly expect to see anythink of her in this darkness,”
said his father, adding no less anxiously, however, “I could wish it
weren’t quite so pesky dark now, so’s we might be able to look round
us and see if they’ve got cl’ar. How did you manage to get to the
‘castle,’ sergeant? And wot brought ye back ’ere again? Did ye lose
your way? Didn’t ye find Bill Seymour’s place, then?”

“No, I only escaped last night from the ambush by the skin of my
teeth, so to speak,” John Dick answered. “I had to run my hardest
through the woods to get away from the Indians, who followed me hard
and long. When they abandoned the chase I was lost, and dead beat; I
crawled in between two rocks and I didn’t wake until near sundown
to-day. Then I climbed a height, and saw the lake, and something
else I will tell you about later, and so returned here. I haven’t
been to the ‘castle,’ and your rescue was none of my planning. Who
are the boys you mentioned as having planned it, you thought, with
me? Who are those you hope are in the ark?”

“Who are them we hope are in the ark! Why, my other three sons,
Abel, Aaron and Abner,” replied the old squatter.

“But I saw them on the verandah of ‘Water Castle’ just before the
attack, along with your wife and your two daughters-in-law,” was
John Dick’s rather astonished remark, for surely, he thought, the
three ex-prisoners must likewise have seen the six on the verandah.

The police-sergeant’s astonishment was increased when his three
companions gave vent to subdued half-laughs and chuckles.

“You _thought you saw_ my three cousins on the verandah with my aunt
and cousins,” said Muriel, softly, “but really you only saw Aunt
Kate and Bella and Deborah, with three dressed-up dummies to
represent my cousins Abel, Aaron, and Abner. It is an old dodge that
we often resort to when we don’t want undesirable parties on the
lakeside to know exactly how many are at home in the ‘castle.’”

“I see. Well, well, I was completely taken in, as also it is evident
were all the redmen. A rare ruse, squatter! I congratulate you upon
it.”

“Oh, it worn’t my idea; it wor Muriel’s,” chuckled Old Alf. “But you
say you weren’t actin’ in partnership with my three lads?”

“No; or at least our partnership was quite accidental. I didn’t know
they were there, though it’s just on the cards that they may have
seen me on the other side of the glade, and have acted as they did,
knowing I would be bound to set you free if they succeeded in
drawing off the band in pursuit.”

“That’s more’n likely,” grunted Amos. “I wish I was sure, though,
that they had got away all right ag’in, in the ark.”

“How did you come to be captured by the Indians?” asked Dick.
“Before I made off into the woods last night, I saw you and your
sons had got clear of the ambush, Mr. Arnold.”

“It was all on account of Jenny, confound her,” replied the old man.
“She thought she might do the same as Hetty Hutter did in that
blamed story of ‘The Deerslayer,’ you know, that we all think so
much of, and got the idea of our water-abode out of. What does she
do but slip off just at dusk in one of the canoes to have a talk
with the Indians and try and bring ’em to see the evil of their
ways--make them abandon their wicked designs upon the ‘castle’ and
our lives, and go back peaceful, like lambs, ag’in to their
Reservation. Muriel spied her when she was more’n halfway ashore. We
could see the redskins’ campfire towards the southwest of the
‘castle,’ and the foolish child was making for it. O’ course some of
us had to follow her, at once, and stop her; and so, Amos and Muriel
and me, we jumped into another canoe and started arter her for all
we were worth.”

“My three brothers were to follow in the ark if we didn’t overtake
her,” Amos took up the narrative. “We didn’t; she was too near the
bank. But we were close behind her when she landed, almost right on
her, and so we all three risked jumping ashore and chasing after her
into the bushes, when we was immediately pounced upon and made
prisoners of by Howling Wolf and a good score or more of his bucks,
who had seen us a-chasin’ of her, and hurried along the bank to
ambush us, which they did neat enough, cuss ’em.”

They had nearly reached the palisading around “Water Castle,” and
Muriel and the old man now hailed Aunt Kate and Jenny, who were
standing together in the doorway of the house. The girl’s mother
seemed to be abusing her roundly for what she had done. As Muriel
hailed her aunt, the old woman pushed Jenny angrily inside the
house, and called back anxiously to know if they were all there and
unhurt.

“We are all here--all, that is, ’cept Abel, Aaron, and Abner,
mother,” answered Old Alf, “and nary a one of us ’as as much as a
scratch. The ark will be along presently, I’ve no doubt. The lads
worked it fine, though it couldn’t ha’ bin worked so well, and we
mightn’t ha’ got cl’ar, if it hadn’t bin for Sergeant Dick here.”

“He’s come back ag’in, and he come just in the nick o’ time whar we
was consarned--jist in time to set us three free arter the boys had
drawn the redskins off. But you saw it all, like as not, from ’ere
in the light o’ the fire they’d lit, so’s ye might--the painted
varmints.”

“Yus, yus, the gals and I seen it all from ’ere, but we didn’t
recognize the sergeant; we thought it must be Abner. The light was
so bad, and it was too far off. Ye’re doubly welcome this time,
sergeant, arter what father’s just told me.”

They had passed through the gate in the palisading, which Jenny had
left open for them; and they in their turn also left it open in the
hope of the ark’s speedy arrival. Paddling up to the verandah, Dick
was giving his hand to Muriel, to help her to step on to the little
landing-ladder, when her aunt and uncle and Amos simultaneously
cried out in tones of relief and satisfaction:

“Hooray! Here’s the ark. They got clear all right. Abel, Aaron,
Abner, are you all right?”

Sergeant Dick followed Muriel quickly on to the ladder, and up it on
to the verandah. He turned then and saw the ark working in through
the stockade-gate in rather a clumsy way.

Three dark forms in cowboy hats and long great-coats could be dimly
seen warping the craft in behind the cabin.

No answer was returned from the ark, however, to the anxious
inquiries of the squatter and his wife, who now called out again to
know if all three aboard were quite all right.

Again no answer was vouchsafed, but the ark, having cleared the
gateway, came shooting swiftly, still propelled by its sail,
straight for the verandah.




CHAPTER XIX--THE SECOND SIEGE OF “WATER CASTLE”


Sergeant Dick, in vague suspicion that all was not as it should be
on the ark, when no answer was returned to the second hail by the
squatter and his wife, hurriedly bundled Muriel and the old woman
inside the open door of the castle.

Deborah and Bella and Jenny had run to the edge of the verandah to
greet the supposed occupants of the scow.

The craft’s broad nose struck the landing-stage close by the little
ladder, just missing running into the canoe in which the old man and
Amos still were.

In the same instant the rear door of the cabin of the ark was thrown
open and out poured a great throng of redskins, led by Howling Wolf
himself.

Shrieking their war-whoop exultantly, they rushed _en masse_ for the
bow and bounded on to the verandah. The three women lining its edge
were nearly knocked down by the rush, and were promptly secured by
some, while the chief, with the main body, tore across to the door
of the castle.

Half a dozen of the redskins leaped down into the canoe and seized
Old Alf and Amos, upsetting the frail craft, however, in their
eagerness and wild haste, and plunging them all, captors and
captured, into the water.

Sergeant Dick, as may be supposed, was not taken so completely by
surprise as the others. As he stood in the doorway, suspicious and
alarmed at the strange silence aboard the ark, he held his rifle at
the ready.

On the rush of the Ogalcrees he promptly aimed from the hip at the
foremost and pressed the trigger, then hastily retreated inside the
door--seeing the others outside taken and no hope of rescuing them.
He slammed it to, flinging his whole weight against it while he
turned the key.

“Guard the left window, quick!” he yelled. “Muriel, you shoot the
bolts. Fire out on them, Mrs. Arnold, or they’ll be in.”

He darted himself to the right-hand loophole, leaving the door only
on the lock. But Muriel at once sprang to it and thrust home first
the bottom bolt and then the top, while a dozen musket-butts
battered thunderously, but otherwise fruitlessly, upon its armored
iron plating outside.

All the steel shutters had been drawn and secured over the windows,
and, thrusting open the loophole in his, Dick poked the muzzle of
his rifle quickly through. He pointed it at a sharp angle across the
doorway without, and pressed the trigger.

Without waiting to hear the three simultaneous screams of agony that
followed the shot, he whipped back the bolt of his rifle, ejecting
his spent cartridge, then forced it home again, bringing another
cartridge into play from the magazine, and pressed the trigger
again.

Two agonized howls answered the shot this time. And old Mrs.
Arnold’s revolver cracked rapidly out of the left-hand window,
eliciting more yells of pain and terror from the Indians attacking
the door.

Through the narrow slit before him, the young police officer saw the
redskins give back from the door, some running to either side along
the verandah, ducking as they went; others--the greater
body--retreating across to the ark.

Five of their number lay in their death-throes just outside the
door, and three more were dragging themselves after the others,
badly wounded.

Not only had all the shots from the house told amongst the densely
packed assailants around the door, but Sergeant Dick’s first shot
through the window, being fired at such close range, went through
the bodies of two men and mortally wounded a third behind them,
while his second, in the same way, accounted for two more.

His keen eyes, used to seeing in the dark and ranging quickly over
the retreating Ogalcrees, saw some of them carrying the body of
their chief, who lay as one dead in their arms.

Howling Wolf had paid the penalty of his crimes at last--had been
shot dead by the sergeant’s hastily but well aimed shot from the
hip.

Both Mrs. Arnold and Sergeant Dick held their fire the moment their
foes fell back from the door, for fear of hitting the three girls
taken prisoners, and who were being hurried by some of their captors
aboard the ark.

“Oh, my cousins! Jenny, and Deborah and Bella! What has become of
them? Are they killed--murdered?” panted Muriel wildly, in horrified
accents.

“No, and they won’t be. Calm yourself, Miss Arnold, and lend a
further hand. You can help by handing me a brace of revolvers or
automatics. They are better than a rifle for close quarters like
this.”

“Yes. Help, gal! Help! Your cousins air taken prisoners, and--and
your uncle and my brave boys must--must be slaughtered. Oh, the
fiends--the cutthroat villains! I’ll have two Indian lives for every
one of theirs--ay, and more!”

And the grief-frenzied old woman thrust the barrel of her
six-shooter out again through her loophole and blazed away whenever
she saw a foeman, turning her weapon upon the three wounded wretches
trying to drag themselves aboard the ark when the others had all
vanished behind shelter.

She shot the three dead. One tumbled into the lake, another lay
across the bulwark of the ark, and the third just in front of its
fore cabin, inside which he was lugged by his comrades the next
moment.

“Watch all the windows on your side, Mrs. Arnold,” said the
sergeant. “Some of the Ogalcrees have fled along the verandah to
either end. They may try and force one or other of our loop-holes.
I’ll be ready for them on this.”

“And I’ll take the door,” said Muriel, quietly. “I’ll fire through
the lower loop in it if the Indians attempt a second rush.”

“Be careful, and don’t unnecessarily expose yourself, Miss Arnold,”
cautioned Dick. “If they come on, strong, you’d better abandon the
loop and secure it, or they may, if they get up again, be able to
fire in through it on us.”

“Oh, my man and our fine lads!” moaned the squatter’s wife.

Then with a savage execration she blazed away again rapidly through
the loop before her. Three of the half-dozen Ogalcrees who had
jumped into the canoe to capture Amos and his father, and had been
soused into the lake with the pair by the craft capsizing, were to
be seen peering cautiously over the edge of the verandah where the
ladder was.

All six had got upon the steps and were cowering there, dripping
wet, collecting their energies for another rush upon the door in
concert with their comrades cowering at either end of the verandah,
when those aboard the ark should return to the attack.

The scow had not been made fast, of course, to the verandah. Being
run bow on against this, it had hitherto merely been kept in place
by the impulse of the sail.

When, however, the assailants all came tumbling pell-mell aboard
again to escape the deadly fire from the house, the craft had
sheered off and was now a good ten feet and more from the platform.

The death of their intrepid and resourceful leader--a host in
himself--as well as their being shut out of the “castle,” when they
had fully counted on being able to get in by their quick rush,
besides their fresh losses, had considerably damped the Ogalcrees’
ardor.

If it had not been that they could not very well abandon the men
left on the verandah, they were so heartily sick of the whole siege
by now, they would probably have raised this and cleared off in the
ark, satisfied with its contents and the prisoners they had managed
to secure. They would probably have paid no heed to the exhortations
of the Black Panther, the next in authority to the dead chief, and
who now assumed command and was all eagerness--as it was the first
of any importance he had ever held--to retrieve their previous
defeats and win glory for himself.

As it was they decided upon another attack. One of their number,
without exposing himself, flung a rope out of a window in the cabin
to the gang on the landing-ladder.

Drawing very little water, but just skimming along the surface, as
before explained, the ark was very easily moved. All six Ogalcrees
on the steps, keeping their heads well below the level of the
platform--out of sight and reach of Aunt Kate--began promptly
hauling on the rope.

“They are returning to the attack. They’ve got a rope to the steps,
and the fellows there are pulling them in,” Sergeant Dick said. And
leveling his rifle again through his loop, he took steady aim at the
taut rope stretching between the ark and the verandah.

As he was about to press the trigger there came a loud, persistent
knocking upon the floor of “Water Castle”--_somewhere underneath
it_.

Muriel and her aunt uttered cries of astonishment, if not alarm,
likewise helping to distract his aim somewhat as he pulled the
trigger. Nevertheless, his shot struck the rope, severing a couple
of the strands.

“Well done, sergeant!” cried Mrs. Arnold. “Shoot again and cut it in
two--foil ’em! Muriel, that must be your uncle and Amos knocking
underneath. They have swum below the house and are at the trapdoor
for sartin. Go and see girl, quick!”

“Be careful, though, Miss Arnold. It may be some of the Ogalcrees,”
said Sergeant Dick, hurriedly ejecting his used cartridge and
bringing another into the breech. “Call out--ask who is
there--before you open the trap.”

Muriel flew towards the central passage where the trapdoor was; and
Sergeant Dick again dwelt carefully upon his aim.

Crack! His piece spoke and the rope parted, the severed ends flying
up and backwards, like black snakes in the darkness.

“Hooray! You are indeed a dandy shot, sergeant,” cried Mrs. Arnold.
“To hit and cut a rope in this blamed darkness! But, look out!
You’ve not stopped the ark’s ‘way.’”

The “way” or impetus the ark had, made that light though clumsy
craft come on towards the landing-stage, and the next moment it had
again bumped into this.




CHAPTER XX--A COOLER FOR THE INVADERS


The Indians, however, did not make another immediate rush, but
opened a terrific fusillade upon the two open loops from the door
and side-window of the ark’s cabin. The craft swung broadside on to
the verandah; and the gang on the steps, grasping the dangling rope,
made this fast again.

Sergeant Dick and Mrs. Arnold blazed back fiercely with a brace of
pistols each, keeping well to the side of their loops, and so
escaping being shot down by the bullets that now occasionally came
winging their way in.

The voice of the Black Panther rang out, issuing an unintelligible
order.

Sharp upon it, the two doors of the ark, the one in the bow and the
other aft, were thrown open and out poured the Ogalcrees in two
dense crowds.

Yelling and whooping, the one in the bows came swarming on to the
verandah, led by the six dripping braves from the stairs, who
brandished their wet and useless rifles and now more serviceable
tomahawks.

Sergeant Dick and Aunt Kate concentrated the fire of their four
pistols upon this band--fired into it as fast as they could.

The foremost red men stumbled and dropped rapidly, tripping up or
otherwise incommoding those behind, several of whom fell over them.
But, bounding over the fallen, others dashed up to the loopholes,
and the sergeant and Aunt Kate had only just time to slam the
sliding covers over these, to prevent being shot in at and the
apertures taken.

Hastily the two defenders hooked the loop-covers, then ran to the
adjacent windows, which also commanded the verandah.

Quickly, but cautiously, opening the loops there, the pair fired out
again at an inward angle, towards one another, so as to sweep the
doorway once more with a cross fire.

But the angle at which they were both obliged to fire being greater
now, they could not hit the men attacking the door, only pot at
those farther back. The door was trembling and groaning under the
energetic onslaught being made upon it.

And then, all at once, a rifle-barrel was thrust in at Aunt Kate’s
loop, and the deadly muzzle spurted a jet of flame and smoke almost
into her cheek.

A second rifle was quickly beside the first. The brave old woman
managed to push both rifles aside and fire out and wound one of
their redskin owners. But she could not dislodge or thrust the
weapons back, nor close the loop cover altogether.

“To the inner room! Retreat to the middle passage, sergeant,” she
screamed. “They’ve got my loophole.”

She turned and ran for the nearest of the three doors behind her,
firing back as she did so at the loop she was thus forced to abandon
in order to distract the aim of the marksmen outside.

Two bullets followed her, but the shots only imbedded themselves on
either side of the inner door, through which she vanished the next
moment.

Sergeant Dick saw through his loop some half a dozen of the Indians
staggering up the landing steps from the ark, hugging between them a
stout spar--a spare mast-yard--with the evident intention of using
it as a battering-ram against the door.

He turned his two revolvers upon the gang and shot down three men.
Then the same number of rifles were thrust in at _his_ loop, and a
knife and a tomahawk came whizzing in, just missing his face.

Desperately he shot out, at the same time as he pushed the
rifle-barrels aside. All three of these discharged their deadly
contents in the same instant close past his head, the bullets
thudding into the logs of the roof.

One of the rifle-barrels was withdrawn--fell out again, as its owner
slid down with a rubbing, scraping noise and a deep groan, shot
through the shoulder by Dick. But the other two remained, and their
owners strove to work their muzzles round towards him.

“Come away! Run for the inner rooms, sergeant! We can hold them
there,” screamed Aunt Kate. “Quit, and leave ’em the loop!”

Seeing the futility of trying any longer to hold it, the police
officer reluctantly obeyed her, wheeling and darting, crouched, for
the door just behind him.

He fired back as _he_ ran and jumped from side to side, and the old
woman also covered his retreat by firing at his loop inside of the
one she herself had abandoned.

She had closed and locked and bolted the door inside which she had
fled, and was now at the door of the central passage, looking out
through a loop in it. Needless to say, she had closed and was
fastening this door also.

The reader, perhaps, may need reminding that there were three doors
in a line along the inner wall of the living-room of “Water
Castle”--all on the opposite side to the entrance. The middle one
led into the central passage or compartment, and the other two into
Aaron’s and the old couples’ bedrooms respectively, on either side
of it.

Several shots were fired in through the two captured loopholes at
Dick as he darted for the inner door, but, thanks to his own tactics
and Mrs. Arnold’s covering fire, he gained it untouched.

It had been left open for the convenience of passing quickly in the
defense of the house, if necessary, from one room to another--and,
in fact, all round this--and, darting within, he swung it to behind
him, then promptly locked and bolted it.

He was about to open the loop in it--for every door in the house was
provided with such, covered over with a little steel slide that
could be hooked to when shut--when Mrs. Arnold, Muriel, and Old Alf
appeared in the door beside him communicating with the central
passage.

“You are safe, sergeant? Oh, thank heaven!” cried Muriel.

As she spoke, Sergeant Dick saw behind her, inside the central
passage, Amos Arnold on hands and knees in the act of dropping a
trapdoor in the floor into its place.

The squatter and his son on being thrown into the water by the
capsizing of the canoe had contrived below the surface to throw off
the grasp of their coppery antagonists, and with sharpened wits,
and, strong swimmers as both were, they promptly struck away under
the water and rose beneath the verandah.

Under there they were safe, of course, from being seen by their foes
in the ark or on the platform; and, being unpursued by their late
captors, the natural idea occurred to both to slip inside the piles
and braces below the house itself and try and gain admission to this
through the trapdoor.

The darkness, of course, was also in their favor. Indeed, it was so
dark under the “Castle” that they both mistook each other for a foe
when they caught sight of one another crawling through the piles.

Recognizing each other in time, however, they then swam silently to
one of the canoes moored under the house and the trapdoor, and,
clambering into it, tried the trap. As they expected, it was fast,
and they were unable to force it; so, waiting for a lull in the
fighting over their heads, they knocked to let the inmates know of
their whereabouts.

“Sergeant, you’re a brick! The most dandy fighter and man I’ve ever
struck yet,” shouted the old squatter. “Let ’em break in, the
painted rips--the cutthroat varmints! They’ll get a reception they
don’t at all expect--one as ’ill rather cool their ardor and put a
damper on their spirits. Hee, hee, hee!”

“But we’ve got to pay ’em,” screamed his wife. “There are the other
three lads and the three girls to avenge if we can’t rescue ’em.”

“We’ll rescue ’em if they’re still alive, mother,” growled Amos.
“And if my brothers are not, the girls are sure to be.”

He disappeared inside the door of his parents’ bedroom, while they
went to the door leading into the living-room. Muriel stepped inside
the room where Dick was and crossed to his side as he threw open the
loop in the door before him and hurriedly proceeded to reload his
two automatics to their fullest capacity.

“You had better stand to one side, Mu--Miss Arnold,” he said, “so as
to be out of the way of any shots that may come through the door. It
will hardly keep shots out like the front one.”

“The door’s stouter than you think. It’s double, with a plate of
steel between the two sheathings,” she answered. “And the Ogalcrees
will get the biggest surprise of their lives when they burst in.”

Thunderous crashes were resounding through the house from the front
door, upon which the Indians were using the improvised battering-ram
with effect. A couple of their number at either of the captured
loops were firing into the castle, and the living-room was full of
smoke and the acrid fumes of burnt gunpowder.

More of the assailants were trying to force the shutters upon the
other front windows.

Crash! One of the hinges of the front door gave, and a long
triangular crack showed some of the Indians outside.

Crack, crack, crack, crack! spoke the rifles of the four defenders,
and the bullets, surging across the intervening room, rattled upon
the window shutters or flew out the widening gap of the door.

A scream of pain outside told that the sergeant’s shot, as usual,
had found its human billet. The Indians, using the spar--carrying it
by means of short ropes noosed round it--retreated until their
rearmost man was on the very edge of the verandah; then forward they
all rushed again and dashed the “ram” once more violently against
the door.

With another splintering, rending crash the second hinge was burst
from its hold, and the door rolled open, precipitating the foremost
of the ram-bearers inside the living-room.

Two of them were at once shot down by the sergeant and Amos, while
two more fell back, dropping their end of the log and clasping their
arms.

With a united yell of triumph the rest of the Ogalcrees came
swarming in, however, and charged across the room for the three
doors opposite. Out rang six revolvers as rapidly as such weapons
can speak, and as many ceaseless streams of fire flew at different
angles through the rushing ranks of the foe.

A man fell or staggered at every shot. Nevertheless, the intruders
were not to be checked by the hottest fire now, believing that
victory was within their grasp.

They poured into the room, jostling each other, crowding upon one
another until the apartment was nearly full and there were not half
a dozen warriors left outside.

The fast-speaking six revolvers, however, prevented the front ranks
from reaching the three doors within. And suddenly, as if by magic,
to the rattle of a bolt wrenched back, the whole floor of the
living-room _dropped like a trapdoor_, plunging all the surging,
tightly packed invaders, feet first, into the water below the
stronghold!




CHAPTER XXI--THE DASH FOR THE ARK


Sergeant Dick was as much astonished as the trapped Indians
themselves--so much so that he held his fire for some few moments
after their fall through the floor.

Not so Amos or Mrs. Arnold, nor even old Alf.

The first two, Amos yelling exultantly like any redskin, pumped
bullets thick and fast, automatic in either hand, into the huddle of
feather-plumed, half-shaven heads bobbing about helplessly in the
water-trap.

And the old squatter, quitting his lever, darted back to the
trapdoor in the central passage, and, hurriedly unfastening it,
lifted it and bent down over it, firing at the swimmers near him.

“Oh, oh!” wailed Muriel in deep distress and magnanimous pity.
“It--it is a horrid butchery now. Oh, let them go--let them get
clear, uncle, aunt, Amos!”

It was indeed nothing short of butchery, as she said. The Ogalcrees
were caught in a terrible death-trap.

Forced to swim for their lives and with their firearms no longer of
the slightest use, they were penned in under the house by the
fenced-in piles. These, as has before been explained, were
interlaced by cross braces all along the outside edge of the
premises, so that the Indians were shut in by so many closed gates,
as it were.

It was, of course, possible to scramble out through this open-work
fencing, for had not Amos and his father got in that way? And the
Ogalcrees on the outside fringe of the mob trapped inside were quick
to start clambering out.

The rest made to follow, that is, the great majority, but some clung
to the piles and cross-bracing under the middle of the house, and
tried to shelter behind the beams from the deadly and merciless
shooting of the defenders.

At such close range nearly every shot of the latter told, for they
could coolly pick their targets and take steady aim. Moreover, the
swimmers were all so tightly packed, a miss was almost impossible.

No wonder Muriel Arnold’s gentle nature revolted from the slaughter.
Redskin after redskin, shot through the brain, would throw up his
arms and slide, an inert mass, under water.

Her kinsfolk paid no heed to her outcry--her prayer for mercy to the
trapped wretches--but continued their deadly shooting, sending
another and yet another copper-colored foeman to the bottom.

Old Alf, at the trapdoor in the middle of the castle, was shooting
almost as many as his son or wife were from the loops in the
living-room inner wall, when--whiz! thud! A tomahawk shot past his
face like a streak of silver light, missing it by little more than a
hair’s breadth, the keen blade striking and sticking quivering in
the door-frame of Aaron’s bedroom alongside him.

He whipped back, startled and just in time to escape being pierced
to the brain by a knife, thrown with equally unerring skill at his
head. The knife stuck, quivering like the tomahawk, in the frame of
his own bedroom on the opposite side of the central passage.

Two of the trapped braves had swum to either side of him under the
bedrooms, where they were sheltered from his son’s and wife’s fire.
There, clinging to piles, and thus partially covered from his fire,
they had shied the hatchet and knife at him with the skill born of
continual practice.

The old man thought it advisable to slam down the trapdoor and shoot
home the sunken bolts upon it.

Sergeant Dick had not fired another shot after the plunging of the
invaders into the water; but he still stood by his loop in Aaron’s
bedroom, ready to shoot if any of the trapped redmen showed any
likelihood of scaling the living-room floor and attempting to
continue the attack on the house. Muriel stood by him, gazing also
through the loop and uttering groans of anguish, and clasping her
hands in horror at the slaughter going on.

Then, all at once, Sergeant Dick woke from the trance that seemed to
possess him, and he shouted:

“Arnold, put back the floor, quick, if you can, and let us attempt a
dash-out to recover the ark before it is too late. There can only be
a few Indians left on the verandah and the ark.”

“You’re right, sergeant. I was nigh forgettin’ about the ark.
That’ll do, Kate--Amos. Get ready to rush out and seize the ark
now.”

And the old man darted to the lever beside the ladder in the
cupboard and dragged it back, straining upon it with all his
strength. The trapdoor of the living-room rose slowly into place
again, but the only way the old man had of securing it in position
for the time being was by hooking a chain on to a ring on the lever,
and so keeping this forced back. The bolts that fastened the floor
in place could only be got at through little traps in the floor
itself. All these bolts were connected by a chain which passed
through an iron pipe in the thickness of the flooring to another
lever in the cupboard.

As the floor of the living-room rose into place again, Amos and his
mother hastily wrenched back the fastenings upon the door in the
central passage.

Sergeant Dick was about to unfasten the door before him when Muriel
exclaimed:

“No, no, don’t open this door. One’s sufficient, in case we have to
retreat. We’ll go out the middle one.”

She and Dick thereupon joined Amos and his mother at the middle
door, and as they got it open and were darting through on to the
trembling floor of the living-room, old Alf stepped out of the
cupboard and followed them.

Across the living-room, its floor shaking and vibrating in its
insecure state under them, the five of them raced to the dismantled
verandah and open front door.

The sergeant held the two women back for a moment while he put out
his head and reconnoitered.

Some seven or eight Indians were at either end of the verandah, the
majority of them dripping with water and more or less exhausted.
More were clambering up all along the verandah front, and some four
or five were clustered on the steps, while as many more were
standing in the bow and stern of the ark, apparently making ready to
cast off.

While the fight had been going on inside the house a nearly full
moon had risen and was now bathing the lake and its distant shores
with the most effulgent rays, lighting it up in an enchantingly
lovely way.

Sergeant Dick was glad of that bright moon--although he had no eyes
at the moment for the beauties of the landscape--for it showed him
the positions of all his enemies. And he beheld outside the “dock,”
or outer ring of palisading, a great number of canoes, filled with
Indian warriors, as well as several great log-rafts. Some of the
occupants of the canoes were engaged in trying to force the gate in
the palisades, so as to admit the flotilla to the aid of their
comrades in front of the castle.

The recapture of the ark, therefore, promised to be anything but an
easy task. It looked as if the defenders had waited too long--lost
too much time in slaughtering the wretches they had trapped by their
drop-floor.

But Sergeant Dick and those with him were not the sort to be easily
daunted, flushed with triumph as they were.

As the young police officer put his face out of the open door, some
of the redmen on the verandah saw it, and, yelling in terror,
immediately plunged off into the water.

Encouraged by this evident sign of demoralization and panic, Dick
echoed their yells with a triumphant shout. And springing out on the
verandah, a revolver in either hand, he banged away right and left
as fast as he could pull trigger, hardly waiting to take aim.

His companions poured after him pell-mell, automatics also in either
hand, and even Muriel seemed carried away by the battle-fever now
and fired right and left as fast and well as any of the others.

The Ogalcrees upon the verandah howled in deadly fear, and one and
all followed the example of the first three or four--tumbled
helter-skelter into the water and swam away for the outer
palisading. Those on the ark broke and fled, in equally abject
dismay, round to the opposite side of the cabin, falling over one
another in their wild scramble.

“Back to the central passage, Muriel, Mrs. Arnold, and you, too,
Squatter, and hold the house still. Drop the trap-floor again. Amos,
you and I will do to take the ark. Come on!”

Sergeant Dick tore across the verandah, closely followed by Amos
Arnold, and jumped on to the bulwark of the scow and down into its
bows.

The door of the cabin stood open. Both men were inside it, had
slammed it to behind them, and were shooting the bolts upon it,
before a shot could be fired at them by the Ogalcrees in the canoes
and on the rafts outside the “dock,” much less before the terrified
cravens who had fled round the cabin could pluck up courage and
oppose them.

Muriel and her uncle and aunt had, in like manner, hastily retired
within the “castle” again, run back to the security of the central
passage, and closed the inner door there.

Then Muriel and her aunt “manned” the loops again, commanding the
living-room as before, while old Alf rushed to the cupboard, to be
ready to drop the trap-floor again if necessary.

A moment later, amid howls of baffled rage, the occupants of the
rafts and canoes poured in their shot at the “castle.” But the
bullets only imbedded themselves harmlessly in the thick logs.




CHAPTER XXII--THE ROUT OF THE BESIEGERS


Sergeant Dick and Amos had no sooner shot the bolts on the inside of
the bow door of the ark than they turned and made for the
after-cabin, glancing about them as they did so in quest of the
three girls.

They saw, instead, Amos’s three brothers--Aaron, Abel and
Abner--lying, bound hand and foot and gagged, upon the seats running
along either side of the cabin. None of the three appeared to be
wounded or injured in any way. Rejoicing at the sight, but unable to
do anything for the trio just then, the two rescuers gained the door
between the two cabins and looked through.

The aft door was open and there was no one outside it. They could
see the silvery moonlight streaming in and flooding the stern-sheets
of the scow without.

By the same ghostly radiance they beheld Jenny and her two
sisters-in-law lying, like the three in the fore-cabin, bound and
gagged, in the berths to either side.

The moon’s rays shot into both cabins, also, through the open loops
in the shuttered windows. The Ogalcrees had left the shutters fast,
but had opened the loopholes in case they had to besiege the
“castle” from the ark.

“Stand there and guard the loops, Amos,” whispered the sergeant.
“Shoot at the first one that darkens, while I secure the aft door.”

Amos, accordingly, remained in the doorway between the two cabins, a
foot in either as well as a hand grasping a smoking pistol, his eyes
ranging quickly along all four windows, ready to fire at any one of
them; and the sergeant of police ran towards the aft door.

But as the young trooper and squatter believed, they had heard
splashes follow upon their leaping aboard the scow. All the
Ogalcrees who had run round the cabin were so scared, they had
jumped immediately, one after the other, into the lake, on hearing
the white men come aboard.

They, too, were now swimming their hardest for the palisades, the
same as were all their exhausted fellow-braves who had escaped from
the water-trap in the “castle”--who had wriggled through the open
work fencing under it.

It was a complete, panic-stricken rout this time. Black Panther, the
new war chief, and fully half of his leading and stoutest sub-chiefs
and braves, were floating--shot dead, or drowned--among the piles
supporting “Water Castle”; and the rest of the band had had quite a
surfeit of fighting for a time at least--had enough of the siege of
that impregnable lake-dwelling, anyhow.

Unhindered in any way, therefore, John Dick, the dashing young
sergeant of Mounted Police, reached the aft door of the ark’s cabin,
or “house,” shut it, and bolted and barred it.

Then he ran to the nearer window, on the side farther from the
“castle,” and peered out through the loophole.

He could see no one on the footboard, or bulwark, of the scow
outside, but all the Ogalcrees swimming away for dear life--for the
safety of the canoes and rafts outside the palisades.

“Hurrah, Amos! We have conquered. The Indians are in full flight
everywhere once more, and I don’t think they will come back again
for many a long day. They’ve had a defeat this last time that they
will not get over in a hurry. Release your brothers, while I attend
to your sisters.”

But Amos thought his brothers could remain tied up a little longer.
He was not going to lose the opportunity of still further punishing
the assailants by the delay it would entail releasing them.

And, as his fellow-rescuer turned from the window in the after
cabin, his rifle cracked out from one in the fore cabin.

He fired again and again at the bobbing heads of the Indians in the
moonlight, and “crack, crack!” in rapid succession came also the
rifles of his mother and father from the front windows of the
“castle,” what time Sergeant Dick cut the cords which bound Jenny
and her sisters-in-law and removed the gags from their mouths.

Leaving the three women, then, to pull themselves together and
restore the circulation of the blood in their cramped limbs, the
trooper hurried through into the fore-cabin and freed Amos’s
brothers.

They all three at once began roundly abusing Amos for not having
released them before, and given them an opportunity of having a
parting and vengeful shot or two at the hated foemen.

“Because I knowed it would only purvent _me_ having a shot,” he
grinned back at them, while slipping a fresh clip of five cartridges
into the breech of his smoking rifle, ere thrusting it again out the
loophole and sighting at the enemy. “And look at ye. Ye can’t use
your legs or arms yet, so what good would it ha’ bin? Ye couldn’t
ha’ done nothink sure.”

“Confound it! My legs mightn’t belong to me, or my arms neither,”
growled Aaron, stamping and tumbling about and rubbing his arms
vigorously, with his face distorted with the pain the stagnant blood
caused him as it began to course again through his veins.

Abel and Abner likewise indulged in anathemas, not loud but deep,
against their late captors for the discomfort and suffering they
were now enduring, and, with Aaron, stumbled towards the other
window and the door to get a shot at the Indians.

But by the time they were able to poke their rifles through the
openings the last redman had swum up to the palisades, passed
through, and been drawn into a canoe or on to one of the rafts. The
Ogalcrees were soon in full retreat, paddling away to the nearer
shore, the eastern one.

Abel and Aaron had armed themselves with the rifles of their wives.
The weapons had been placed in a corner of the cabin by the Indians
after capturing the women.

Abner coolly appropriated Sergeant Dick’s rifle, for the police
officer had slipped the piece from his shoulder to free him and his
brothers.

Sending a couple of shots apiece whizzing after the canoes and
rafts--without any success on account of the deceptive moonlight,
the distance the craft were away, and the pain and awkwardness still
of their limbs--the three baffled marksmen cursed their ill-luck and
their brother Amos again for denying them the better chance. Then
their father was heard hailing the ark.

“Amos! Sergeant! Are the girls safe? And are the other lads there?”

“Ay, ay, Squatter! They are all here, quite safe--none the worse,
any of them,” called back Dick, merrily, adding with a light laugh,
“Can’t you hear your sons cussing because they’ve been cheated by
Amos of having a last smack at the redskins?”

“Ay, ay, we’re here, and all on us all right, dad,” shouted Abel,
the eldest of the sons, turning from the window to clasp his wife
Bella in his arms and exchange mutual gratulations with her.

Aaron--the second and other married brother--greeted _his_ wife
Deborah in like manner; while Abner, the youngest of the four sons,
restored Sergeant Dick his rifle in a sulky way, without so much as
a “Thank you.”

For that matter neither had he or either of the other two young
squatters in any way acknowledged the police-sergeant’s kindness in
setting them free. But their apparent ingratitude, or want of common
politeness, might be excused by their over-eagerness to have a slap
at their late captors.

With the dread enemy in full retreat to the shore, there was no need
for them to linger inside the ark; and they all now made a move
towards the bow-door, Abner and Amos bringing up the rear after
closing and fastening the loops on all the windows, and then locking
the fore door.

Muriel and her uncle and aunt came out of the “castle” on to the
verandah to greet them, and old man Arnold sent a parting shot with
his rifle in the direction of the Indians, who could be seen just
landing on the eastern shore, shadowy silhouettes against the less
dusky background.

As they all reëntered “Water Castle,” chattering and laughing like
so many magpies, Muriel and the sergeant fell to the rear, and
clasped hands silently but eloquently.

Muriel’s eyes shone brightly in the moonlight, and John Dick thought
he had never seen her look quite so lovely as in that silvery
radiance upon the white-bathed verandah with its clean-cut shadows.

Neither noticed how Abner, the youngest son, watched them with
scowling, jealous-distorted face and fiercely gleaming eyes.

“The painted rips’ll not come back ag’in,” declared old Alf,
decidedly. “We gev ’em their bellyful this last time, anyways. Ho,
ho! They don’t want another such gruelling, I’ll swar. Bust ’em!
They’ve sp’iled our front door, lads and lassies; but we’ll patch it
up just for to-night and make it all right, as good as ever,
to-morrow. Just see what you can do with it, Abel, Aaron, and Abner.
Amos and you girls, Muriel and Jenny, lend me a hand and help fix up
the drop-floor as it should be. Bella and Deb, mebbe you will aid
mother to get us all somethink to eat and drink, ’specially drink,
arter the hot and thirsty work we’ve had.”

“Can’t I be of any assistance?” asked Sergeant Dick.

“Ye’ve done more’n enough, I should say, sergeant, but ye can help
the gals and me and Amos to fix up the floor as ye’re such a glutton
for work.”

The old trapper or squatter and his daughter and niece and Amos got
down on their hands and knees upon the strip of flooring which had
remained in position when the rest of the floor dropped.

This strip, of course, was a mere ledge, only a couple of feet wide,
just inside the front door and bordering the front wall.

Pressing upon a board, each, the quartet caused it to slide partly
out of sight under the front wall, and disclosed a solid steel bar,
some four feet long and more than two inches in diameter, lying in
the cavity. Attached to the back of the steel bolts was a chain
which ran out of sight into an iron pipe under the board.

Opposite the other end of the bolt, in the thickness of the edge of
the portion of flooring which had dropped, was a socket, and Muriel
tried to push her bolt home in this.

The sergeant promptly insisted on saving her the trouble. He forced
the bolt inside the socket as far as it would go, then helped Jenny
to push hers home, what time old man Arnold and Amos had shot theirs
and gone on to a fifth and sixth, and the other three brothers were
fixing the dismantled outer door in place again by piling all manner
of things against it, including the armored tiller-screen from the
ark.

The drop-floor was still anything but quite firm under their feet,
even with the six great bolts shot, and the old man asked Sergeant
Dick to follow him through to the central passage and see him finish
fixing it.

Full of curiosity, the young police officer accompanied him to the
cupboard where the levers were, and the old man explained that, by
wrenching back one, all six bolts they had just shot were drawn out
simultaneously, but that the floor in the ordinary way would not
give until six more pivoted iron buttons, also hidden in the
flooring, were drawn aside.

A second lever contrived this, and a third would draw them back
again. This third lever was now pulled, while all in the living-room
were told to stand off the drop part of the floor. And then Arnold
went on to tell John Dick that he had contrived to raise the
trap-floor by means of yet a fourth lever, which dragged on a chain,
that always hung slacked under the house, attached to the edge of
the trap-floor and passing through a ring or socket in the
stationary part of the flooring opposite and round back to the
lever.

“By pulling on this ’ere fourth lever, then, you see, sergeant, the
trap-floor is raised and kin be held in place until we can fix up
all the reg’lar fastenings. Come now, let’s join the others ag’in,
and have somethink to eat and drink.”

“And I’ve got something to tell you all that will astonish you very
much, Squatter--something I discovered among the cliffs on the west
shore.”




CHAPTER XXIII--THE PLAN TO ROUND UP THE WHITE HOODS


Sergeant Dick did not notice the startled, anxious glance that old
Arnold gave him as they went back to the living-room. There they
found a substantial meal spread for them.

Ere they all sat down to it, some of their number took a look out
through the loops on all four sides of the house. The lake was still
bathed in moonlight, and not an Indian canoe or raft was to be seen
anywhere.

“Well, now, sergeant, what’s this astonishing news that you’ve got
to tell us?” asked the old squatter, with his mouth full. “What’s
this something that you said you had discovered among the cliffs on
the west shore, and which I presumes brought ye back so timely here
ag’in?”

His sons and their mother all started and exchanged covert, alarmed
glances, then eyed the young police officer keenly and by no means
favorably.

As it happened, he had his eyes bent upon his plate at the time, and
did not observe the strange, gloomy looks, which, after all, as
before, were most veiled.

“I’ve discovered the ‘duffing-den’ of the White Hoods, I believe,”
he quietly replied.

“What!”

And Amos Arnold sprang up, nearly upsetting his chair.

“Yes, I believe so,” said Sergeant Dick. And he went on to relate in
full his experiences of the previous night after his escape from the
Indian ambush; how he climbed the water-slide and found the
cup-shaped valley and saw several hundred head of cattle, sheep, and
horses grazing within it.

His companions listened in silence, Muriel and Jenny in breathless
interest. None interrupted him, the young men only contriving to
steal questioning glances at one another behind their mugs, and
particularly at their father.

Muriel and Jenny hung excitedly upon Dick’s every word; and when he
had told them all, the first-mentioned cried out:

“Oh, uncle--boys, what a grand discovery! It must be the outlaws’
secret duffing-den right enough. You and Sergeant Dick now can
capture the gang and claim the reward offered. What is it--five
hundred pounds, isn’t it?”

“I had instructions to increase the reward to a thousand pounds,”
said Dick.

“A thousand pounds; and not only that, but you will rid these parts
of these murderous robbers who have so long terrorized us. In fact,
I believe their plundering has helped to incite the Ogalcrees to
rebel and go on the warpath, for they, besides suffering heavily at
the gang’s hands, have been blamed for some of its misdeeds, as we
know.”

“Yes, yes,” chimed in Jenny. “It will be a grand thing for all round
here when those awful White Hoods are put down; the poor farmers and
ranchmen will sleep more easily in their beds. You will be doing
humanity a service, father--brothers--if you help the sergeant to
lay the gang by the heels.”

“We shall be doing ourselves a big sarvice, too, if we make a
thousand pounds over the job,” guffawed her father. “By thunder,
lads--mother, we’ll have a shot at it; we’ll help the sergeant to
capture these fellows. But only on one condition, sergeant, and that
is, that you let no one else into the secret; that we keep it to
ourselves. I don’t want no others to share the thousand quid, you
understand?”

“That’s so--that’s so,” cried his wife. “A thousand pounds divided
equally between six on you--the four lads, you Alf, and the sergeant
here, ain’t two hundred apiece. Lemme see, how much would it be? Six
into a thousand goes what, Muriel--Bella?”

“Oh, never mind, aunt. The reward is not ours yet to divide,” said
Muriel hastily, and blushing a deep crimson. “And don’t you think
that Sergeant Dick should have more than any one else, as he
discovered the gang’s lair?”

“Come, come, we won’t discuss that,” laughed Dick. “In any case it
will be for Government to apportion the reward. All right, Arnold,
we’ll keep it to ourselves, and you and the lads will help me to lay
these white-robed rustlers by the heels, as Jenny put it. Let me
see, they are supposed to number either nine or ten at full
strength.”

“That’s so. And we are six,” said Abel, the eldest son, “but then we
ought to catch ’em napping, and not in full strength.”

“When shall we make the attempt?” asked Aaron, the second son.
“We’ve evidently routed the redskins for good and all this time.
They’re not likely to give us any further trouble. And the sooner we
go the better, say I.”

And he exchanged a meaning glance with his father and mother.

“Oh, there’s no immediate hurry,” said Dick. “With the Ogalcrees out
on the warpath, the gang will be bound to lie snug and not try to
remove their stolen cattle and sheep for fear of being attacked on
the march by the Indians. Besides, it will be as well, first, to
make sure that the redmen have abandoned the siege here for good and
all. We don’t want them to attack the house in our absence while
only the ladies are here, nor attack us, for that matter, while
landing, as they did before--nor yet in the woods. A day more or
less can’t make any difference one way or the other as regards the
White Hoods, while it may mean a great deal as regards your home
here.”

“The sergeant is right,” observed Bella, Abel’s wife; and Deborah
and Muriel murmured approval. “And you all need a good night’s rest
before setting out on so risky an expedition.”

“Wait till to-morrow night,” said Muriel, “then we’ll know for
certain whether the Indians have abandoned the warpath, and we may
be able to send word to the soldiers at the nearest fort, if word
has not already gone there, of the rising.”

This was sensible advice, and it was unanimously agreed on; and,
shortly after, all declared for bed. The supper things were cleared
away; the living-room was divided off into three compartments by the
shabby curtains on the rods being drawn across, and a hammock slung
in each compartment for Amos, the sergeant, and Abner respectively.

All the others then retired to their bedrooms, and silence and
darkness speedily enwrapped the stronghold in the lake.

Sergeant Dick slept soundly in his hammock; but he was accustomed to
sleeping on a hair-trigger, as one might say, and from time to time
he awoke, rose, and went to the front door or the window on either
side of it and looked forth.

All was still and peaceful. The lake and the woods south and east
and west seemed slumbering under the silvery moon.

Thoroughly refreshed, he was up before the dawn, and went to the
bathroom at the back of the house to wash himself. When he returned
to the living-room he found that Amos and Abner had arisen, the
curtains had been drawn back, and Mrs. Arnold, Muriel and Jenny were
already preparing breakfast, with front door and windows open to
admit the sweet warm morning air.

They all--even the surly Abner--greeted him cordially; and he
thought Muriel prettier than ever in the rosy light of the dawn.

Bella and Deborah, the two married daughters-in-law, made their
appearance shortly, and then old Alf and their husbands.

All the men went out on the verandah to smoke a morning pipe before
breakfast; and, seated upon it, looking out across the water and
scanning the shore in all directions for any sign of their late
besiegers, they discussed at length their plans for the
“rounding-up” of the White Hoods.

They were at breakfast when they heard the plash of paddles and men
hailing the “castle.”

As the morning was so warm and fine they had the door wide open and
all the windows, too, but no foes could have stolen on them unawares
very well.

Rushing forth, they saw approaching the “castle” from the direction
of the landing-spit on the east shore four canoes carrying three
white men apiece.

Through the field-glasses they recognized the new comers as Foulkes,
the Indian agent, a couple of the local police troopers, two of the
officers from the nearest fort, and some ranchmen and cowboys of the
neighborhood.

All twelve visitors were warmly welcomed by the inmates of “Water
Castle,” who plied them eagerly with questions as to how matters had
gone in the district--the doings elsewhere, of course.

The Ogalcrees, it appeared, had committed a few isolated outrages,
burning and plundering some half-dozen or more farms. But for the
most part they had spared the inmates, or these had escaped and they
had contented themselves with the drink and valuables they got.

Word had been conveyed to the troops, however, and these had now
arrived at the Reservation on Paquita Island and were holding all
the chiefs who had not followed Howling Wolf on the warpath as
hostages for the good behavior of the rebels.

These last had fled _en masse_ across the frontier into the United
States, and were expected to be shortly rounded up and forced to
submit by Uncle Sam’s troops.

Sergeant Dick was wanted at the Reservation to help to satisfy the
Indians there that Government had acted in good faith by them, and
already sent the money due upon their claims, but that it had been
intercepted and stolen by the White Hood rustlers, or road-agents,
and that it would be made good later.

Accordingly, he went off with the visitors in one of their canoes an
hour or so later, promising old Alf and his two elder sons quietly
aside, however, before he did so, that he would return at nightfall
and go with them to the gang’s secret lair, and in the meantime not
tell another soul about it.

Sure enough, just as dusk was falling over the lake and the wooded
hills embosoming it, a canoe containing a single occupant was seen
by the inmates of “Water Castle” to be approaching from the southern
end of the sheet of water; that is from the direction of the Indian
Reservation.

Old Alf and his sons had been out the best part of the day visiting
the traps that they had set the evening of the Ogalcree rising, and
had just got back. Most of their traps they had found interfered
with by the redskin raiders, but those which had not been so
molested had contained furred victims sufficient to repay them well
for the trouble and time taken in setting them.

They had reset the traps for the night, and then returned home.
Bella and Deborah did not always accompany the men on their trapping
expeditions, though they frequently did so, as sometimes also did
Muriel and Jenny, and even Aunt Kate.

The canoe coming from the south end of the lake was speedily near
enough for the squatters to see that Sergeant Dick was in it, and
soon after he was partaking of some light refreshments in the
“castle” living-room, preparatory to leading the expedition.




CHAPTER XXIV--IN THE HANDS OF MERCILESS FOES


The sky was overcast and there was no moon, as they set forth in two
canoes, the one Sergeant Dick had come back in and one of the craft
kept beneath the house.

Old Alf, Abel, and the sergeant went in the first canoe, and Aaron,
Amos and Abner in the second.

Paddling softly to the western shore, they landed with equal
stealth, for there was no saying what watch the rustlers were in the
habit of keeping on the woods thereabouts.

They hauled their two craft ashore, and concealed them amongst the
bushes.

“I suggest,” said Abel, then, “that we march in single file, you
leading the way, sergeant.”

“Very good,” answered the police officer.

They threaded their way warily through the dense woods; and, in
spite of the darkness, Dick led them unerringly to the foot of the
waterslide.

For that matter, they all of course knew where it was, had
frequently seen and passed it, but, according to their own story,
had never had the curiosity to climb it as he had done, or explore
the perpendicular, terraced rocks behind it.

“We had better climb up in the same way as I did--by means of the
trees over-arching the water,” John Dick whispered. “Sling your
rifles securely now, and make sure your pistol-holsters are--”

“Hands up, all, or you’re dead men!”

The unexpected mandate made even Sergeant Dick jump.

He whipped round and saw five awful, ghostly, white-hooded,
white-clad forms confronting him and his companions, with two
pointed automatics each.

It would have been madness--certain death to have attempted
resistance or defiance in the teeth of those ten leveled little
tubes. Nevertheless, Sergeant Dick was the last of the punitive
force to put up his hands.

The five squatters hoisted theirs promptly.

None of the prisoners had his rifle unslung or a pistol drawn.

“Tie them up, Bud,” ordered the leader of the White Hoods.

And one of the five ghostly forms thrust his pistols into his belt
and advanced. The gang had clearly been posted behind a large rock
close by the water-slide.

In their ghostly disguise the fellows did not look human. Their
high-peaked hoods, drawn down to their chins so as to conceal the
face, had only two holes cut for the eyes, and their long, white,
shapeless smocks descending to the tops of their knee-boots
completely concealed their figures, and added to their spectral
appearance.

“Let’s see who they be,” said the leader in a voice which sounded
_feminine_ and also familiar to the sergeant’s ears.

He flashed an electric torch, and shone it first upon Dick’s face
and form.

“Curses! A trooper, and a sergeant at that! So the cops have tumbled
to whar we hang out, lads. That’s bad. Hullo! You are the squatter
of the lake, Old Alf Arnold, the father of ‘Water Castle.’ And
you’re his son, and you, and you,” as he flashed his torchlight in
turn upon the faces of the young men.

“You dodrotted fools! What are you doing roving round here at this
hour of the night? Don’t tell me a lie, you were out arter us?”

“Nothing of the kind,” lied old Alf. “’Ow should we know as ’ow we’d
run up agin you ’ereabouts? We are out a-settin’ of our traps, and
the sergeant’s come with us just acause he’s bin a-stayin’ wi’ us at
‘Water Castle’ durin’ this ’ere Injun risin’. Didn’t you ’ear ’ow he
helped us to beat ’em off? They besieged us hot and ’eavy in the
‘Castle’ several nights runnin’.”

“Yus, I heerd all about that, but your comin’ here looks darned
suspicious-like, all the same, and so I’m not agoin’ to let ye go
yet awhile. Tie ’em up, Bud, and blindfold ’em, too. We can’t take
no risks.”

“Bud” proceeded to bind the sergeant’s hands behind his back, and
then to blindfold him, after which he was relieved of all his
weapons and valuables.

He was then kept waiting while his fellow-prisoners were,
apparently, likewise being attended to.

“’Urry up, ’urry up, Bud!” the chief at last said, impatiently; and
a minute or two later a heavy hand fell on Dick’s shoulder and he
was told to step out.

Almost immediately he felt the ground rising steeply as he was
conducted along, and he was climbing up a slope which obliged his
captors to give him a helping hand. The gang were now evidently
joined by as many more men, for he heard them moving in front and
around him as well as whispering to one another.

Up and up the steepest of paths or rocky defiles they climbed, until
presently a halt was called, and the voice of the leader added:

“Now put the rope round his neck, and throw it over the branch, and
I’ll jist scribble the message to pin on his breast. You kin remove
the bandage from his eyes, one of ye. I mout as well tell you,
sergeant, we’re a-going to hang you, as a hexample to your
fellow-cops, to show ’em what they’ve to expect from us if they try
to hunt us down. Your fellow-prisoners we’ve let go, without their
arms, watches, money, and other trifles. We’ve no great grudge agin
them, and we allus likes to keep in wi’ men like Squatter Arnold, as
ain’t got much to lose or tempt us, and who can be of great sarvice
to us by giving us information when the cops are arter us.”

The cloth was removed from the young police officer’s eyes, at the
same time as a noosed rope was slipped round his neck.

He saw that he was standing under a tree at the edge of a ravine,
some forty feet deep, through which ran a fairly wide and level
road. On either side of him were his captors, the dreaded White
Hoods--nine now in number. A tenth ghostly form was climbing into
the tree, to pass the rope over a stout branch.

Not one of the Arnolds was to be seen.

The chief put a paper flat against the tree-trunk, and, while a
companion flashed an electric torch, proceeded to write something
upon it.

Sergeant John Dick gave himself up for lost. It was plain that the
murderous ruffians meant to hang him there above the mountain road,
where his dead body would be found on the morrow by the first
ranchman or homesteader who chanced to ride that way.

Nevertheless, he scorned to ask for mercy from the villainous
gang--to beg for his life.

“Ho! ho! me bowld trooper, your goose is cooked now, anyways,”
gloatingly jeered the White Hood above him--in the tree.

Sergeant Dick could barely suppress a start, _for he knew that voice
also_.

“You may hang me, you atrocious scoundrels,” he said, boldly and
fearlessly, “but, as sure as there is a heaven above me, you will
reap a terrible reward for such a crime. Heaven will not let you go
unpunished. You--”

For the second time that night he was not allowed to finish a
sentence. There were startled cries in the ravine below--two
exclamations of horror and anger. And, as all eyes were turned in
the direction of the unexpected sounds, Sergeant Dick beheld, to his
infinite relief and joy, two police troopers, in the familiar
Stetson hats and red coats, sitting astride horses at the turn in
the road.

Their sudden appearance there, without a sound having broken the
stillness, except their startled ejaculations at the sight of the
terrible drama about to be enacted above them, was quite spectral.
And so several moments the White Hoods stood staring aghast at them.

The troopers, indeed, were the first to act. They had their rifles
at the ready in front of them. Promptly jerking the butts to their
shoulders, they fired upwards at the gang on the cliff.

In spite of the haste of the marksmen, the bullets were well aimed.
Two of the White Hoods staggered and nearly fell, and Sergeant Dick
heard, he believed, _two distinct clangs_ as if the bullets had
struck against iron or steel!

Flinging themselves from the saddles immediately on firing, the two
troopers sheltered behind their horses and let drive again up at the
gang. And the fellow in the tree over Dick’s head came clambering
down so hurriedly that his long white smock caught on one of the
branches and was lifted up, exposing a coat of dull, gleaming iron.

He was unable to free the entangled garment for a moment or two, and
the amazed young police-sergeant saw plainly that he was wearing
under it a rudely made breastplate and backpiece of armor, fastened
together with straps at the side--a perfect iron corselet such as
knights or rather men-at-arms wore in medieval days!

Furthermore, hanging from the lower edges of this coat of iron were
rounded pieces to cover the thighs, both back and front, almost to
the knees.

Surprised beyond measure at the revelation that the gang wore armor,
Sergeant Dick remembered, however, at the same time that the
notorious Ned Kelly gang of bushrangers in Australia in 1880 wore
similar protection, and so were able for a long period to laugh at
the bullets of the Mounted Police.

Without a doubt these White Hood rustlers had got the idea of
armoring themselves from the well-known story of the Kelly gang.

Two more of the ruffians had staggered under the well-directed shots
of the two troopers in the ravine. But now the gang had got over its
surprise. It fired back in a volley, and one of the policemen’s
horses reared, plunged wildly, and, breaking away, tore off down the
road.

Its master dodged quickly behind his companion’s horse. Some dozen
or more troopers, now, however, came galloping noiselessly, like so
many specters, round the bend in the ravine. They ranged themselves
alongside the first two and poured in a deadly fire at the bandits.

It was plain that the hoofs of all the police-horses were muffled.

“Furies! Fly, lads! Run! We can’t fight so many,” shouted one of the
White Hoods.

The fellow hanging by his white smock from the tree wrenched himself
free with a desperate effort and a savage oath, leaving a strip of
the garment clinging to the branch. He made as if to spring upon
Sergeant Dick, but two of the others dragged him off.

“Dead min tell no tales,” howled another bandit, however, rushing at
the prisoner with upraised knife in one hand and smoking rifle in
the other.

The knife would have been sheathed in the young police-sergeant’s
breast; but, swift as thought, he raised his right foot and dashed
it with all his force into the chest of his would-be murderer, even
as the idea struck him that _the voice sounded strangely like a
woman’s_. Woman or man, the White Hood was sent reeling heavily
backwards, Sergeant Dick’s boot eliciting a ringing clang from the
concealed coat of iron under the white smock. The knife went flying
over the edge of the cliff into the ravine.

Its owner went down flat on the back, but was promptly dragged
upright by another of the gang who snarled:

“Cuss it! ain’t ye got no sinse, Martha? Afore their very eyes! We
must git, _woman_!”

And then all ten fled, crouching, into the bushes, and were quickly
swallowed up by these and the darkness.




CHAPTER XXV--ON THE TRACK


“Up the rocks, men, quick!” cried the inspector in command of the
little _posse_ of police.

Promptly the troopers swarmed forward from behind their horses,
rushed to the side of the ravine, and began clambering up it. The
majority of them chose a place where the cliff sloped gently back
and was broken up into shelves and ledges like a natural stairway.

A couple remained entrenched behind the horses, with their rifles
leveled across their own animals’ backs, covering their comrades.

The inspector led the rush up the rocks. No shots were fired at
them, and it was plain that the White Hoods had fled the scene.

The inspector topped the cliff first, a revolver in either hand.
With eyes fiercely peering into the bushes and the darkness before
him, he sidled up hurriedly to Sergeant Dick.

“Thank heaven, we came this way, sergeant. We were just in the nick
o’ time.”

In another half-minute John Dick was free in body and limb again,
and the inspector was shaking him by the hand, while the troopers
could be heard beating the bushes all about and searching these with
bulls’-eyes and electric torches to find the trail of the rustlers.

A pleased shout denoted a discovery, and the inspector and Sergeant
Dick at once made for the spot.

“Inspector,” said Dick, quietly, as they went, “we needn’t trouble
about following their trail. I know who two of the band are, or, at
any rate, I believe I know who they are. And, what is more, I have
discovered the band’s secret duffing-den, and can lead you to it.”

“You know two of them, and where their duffing-yard is? Excellent!
Who are the pair?”

“Bill Seymour, the shepherd hereabouts on Lonewater Ranch, _and his
wife_. At least, as I said, I have reason to believe that they are
two of the gang.”

“_And his wife!_”

“Yes. And she’s not the only woman in the gang. There are several.
They disguise themselves as men, of course, and are the wives
and--and daughters, I believe, of the others.”

“You suspect others than the Seymours, then?”

“I do; but I will not name any others yet for fear I am making a
dreadful mistake. If you will allow me _carte blanche_ in the
matter, however, inspector, and not ask me to name these other
suspects right away, I will take means to verify my suspicions
within the next twenty-four hours.”

“Do as you please, sergeant. I will not interfere with you,” replied
the inspector, whose name was Medhurst. “Now what we must do is at
once divide our forces, I suppose, and let one party make for the
Seymours’ hut, to lay them by the heels, and the other accompany you
to this duffing-yard you say you’ve discovered.”

“I think we can kill the two birds with the one stone, inspector,”
replied Sergeant Dick, who had been studying the positions of the
stars while he was talking. “We are on the northwest side of the
cliffs of the Wonderful Echo, are we not? And not far from the
Seymours’ shanty?”

“That is so. The Indians and trappers round here call these curious
terraced heights just along to our right the Cliffs of the Wonderful
Echo. Their name on the map, and of the whole range, is the Waikuta
Hills.”

“Well, I believe the entrance to the secret duffing-yard of the gang
is close beside the Seymour shanty. Let us make a move thither at
once. If we lose no time we may find the entire gang at the shanty,
for they can have no idea, I think, that I suspect even the two
Seymours.”

“You wouldn’t advise dividing our force--sending a few of the men
along the trail the fellows have left?”

“No, for two reasons, inspector. First, because I must tell you the
band wear armor under their white smocks and hoods.”

“What!”

“It is true. They wear coats of mail, capable of stopping a bullet,
just like the Kelly Gang of bushrangers did in Australia. You’ve
read of Ned Kelly, the iron bushranger?”

“Yes, yes.”

“Well, this gang all wear a similar kind of armor. Evidently they
got their idea from the Kelly Gang. And with them thus protected,
we’ll need all the men we’ve got, inspector, if not more, to capture
or wipe them out.”

“By Jove, yes, in that case.”

“My other reason against your sending any of the troopers to follow
the trail is that the fellows are bound to blind it effectually, as
they have done before.”

“Just so, or it might mean sending the men to their death; the White
Hoods might form an ambush, and, iron-clad as they are--” He broke
off, and added, “I will send a man on to Paquita for reënforcements,
and we’ll make for the Seymours’ place.”

Without further delay, one of the two troopers with the horses in
the ravine was sent galloping on down the road, south towards the
Indian Reservation. Inspector Medhurst, Sergeant Dick, and the
troopers around them returned to the man’s companion; and, all
mounted, Dick being taken up behind the inspector, who rode a big,
powerful bay, strong enough to carry them both a good few miles
without turning a hair.

Northward, then, they struck, back along the road leading towards
Lonewater, the way they had come.

Only a short distance did the road skirt the line of hills, then
these turned sharply eastward, while the road continued on
northward.

The hoofs of the horses, being muffled, had made no sound on the
road. And the party now quitted this and followed the cliff-line,
striking across an undulating meadow-like country, or prairie,
broken up here and there by wooded hills or “buttes.”

As they rode at the gallop, it was not easy to carry on a
conversation. Nevertheless, Sergeant Dick and Inspector Medhurst
were able to exchange occasional remarks on account of the way they
were riding; and the former explained that he had heard the
ringleader of the White Hoods call one of the others “Bud.”

“Bud!” exclaimed the inspector. “That’s Bill Seymour right enough.
He goes by the nickname of ‘Bud’ among his friends. He’s better
known as ‘Bud’ Seymour than Bill, as a matter of fact.”

“That so? I didn’t know that, but when the Arnolds were directing me
as to my best way of getting to Lonewater, they mentioned Bill
Seymour--I was to make a half-way call at his place--and one of the
sons chanced to refer to him once as ‘Bud’ Seymour. His wife, too, I
understand, is named Martha, and one of the White Hoods, who was
certainly a woman, the fellow ‘Bud’ called ‘Martha,’ as he helped
her to her feet just before they vamoosed.”

“That’s good enough,” gleefully crowed Inspector Medhurst. “Seymour
and his wife are members of the gang, sure enough.”

Medhurst went on to explain that the foreman of the Lonewater Ranch
had been visiting the Seymours earlier in the evening, and, on his
way eastward to pay his respects to the Arnolds, had seen three of
the White Hoods riding towards him.

“They did not see him,” said the inspector. “He had just pulled up
among some trees to light his pipe, and he hid himself and his
horse, and waited until they had passed by. Then he postponed his
call at ‘Water Castle,’ and made back to Lonewater at top-speed to
rouse us out after the fellows. From the direction the three were
taking, he concluded they were making round the hills for the
Paquita Road, and so we came this way. I thought they might be after
the Paquita and Lonewater stage, and so ordered the horses to be
muffled, and lucky for you, sergeant, that I did, eh?”

“Yes, indeed, sir. The foreman of Lonewater saw only _three_ of the
gang. H’m!”

Neither of the pair said anything further until, presently, the
inspector whispered that they were close to the Seymours’ shanty,
and silently signaled to the troopers behind to halt and dismount.

“We’ll creep up to the place on foot and try to carry it at a rush,
in case they are all inside,” he added.

As before, two troopers were left with the horses, and the pair were
instructed to prevent the animals from neighing. Ten in number, the
rest of the police were spread out in a long line, with the
inspector at one end of it and Sergeant Dick at the other, and they
crept forward through the darkness and the billowy grass.

The pace was purposely slow, and each man put his heel on the ground
before the toe at every step, thus making no noise.

The high, beetling cliffs on the right hand overshadowed them all,
but, before they had advanced fifty yards, Sergeant Dick saw the
blacker outline of the log-hut cutting the skyline.

All was in darkness as if the inmates were asleep or absent.

Stealthily the police deployed still more, so as to enclose the
hut--throw their line from one side of it to the other, and hem it
in against the cliff-wall at its back. Then the whispered word was
passed along from man to man to close in upon it, as they advanced
again.

Not a sound broke the stillness of the night. The grass now was
short, and the ground hard and rocky in places, so the troopers put
their toes first to earth and raised their feet high with each step,
in accordance with the rules taught them for moving silently under
such conditions.

They got up close to the hut--within half a dozen strides of it--and
then with a swift rush reached the door and windows--were around it.

Unceremoniously, the troopers in front of the door immediately
battered at it with their rifle-butts, waking a hundred echoes from
the cliffs and hills while those at the windows thrust their
rifle-barrels in under the shutters to pry these open.

In less time almost than it takes to relate it, a window-shutter at
either side of the premises had been forced open, and the assailants
were ready to pour as many volleys into the house.

Everything remained silent within, however, and Sergeant Dick called
out, softly:

“They are not back yet, inspector. The place is deserted, I should
say.”

It was as he said, and, abandoning the assault on the stout,
strongly barred door, all the police flocked to the unshuttered
windows. These were forced in their turn, but with as little noise
as possible now, and the troopers climbed in and ranged through the
rooms.

“There’s an underground passage leading from the hut to a secret
cave within the cliffs, inspector. Do you know?” Sergeant Dick said,
as he and the inspector met inside the kitchen, entering through
opposite windows.

“Look for it, men. It will be in one of the inner rooms. There’s no
sign of it here.”

“Here it is, sir!” immediately sang out one of the troopers from the
bedroom.

Sergeant Dick and his superior officer ran in and saw the troopers
raising a trapdoor in the floor. It had been covered by a strip of
druggeting, and, moreover, by the bed.

These had been dragged aside before the troopers entered, evidently
by the Seymours, who had gone out that way.

A square, box-like hole, timbered all round, about four feet deep,
was uncovered.




CHAPTER XXVI--THE THREATENING LETTER


“It was Alf Arnold, the squatter of the lake, who told me of this
underground passage,” said Sergeant Dick. “I see it has a concrete
flooring. As sure as a button, inspector, Seymour and his wife will
return this way, unless they have caught the alarm--heard us
breaking in, or, for some other reason, don’t intend coming back.
Will you remain here with half the men, and I will take the rest
through the passage to the cave and wait there for awhile in hopes
of their coming? Do you know, I’ve an idea, too, that that cave will
tell us something.”

“You don’t think they were in the house and fled through the
passage?”

“No, sir; they couldn’t have got here before us, I’m certain.”

“Very good, sergeant! Select your men. I hope the pretty pair
haven’t given us the slip--_will_ return to their nest. Of course,
many of these log huts in the wilds, as you know, both here in
Canada and across the border in the United States, have underground
passages like this to provide a means of escape for the occupants in
case of attack by any desperadoes, so its existence proves nothing.”

Sergeant Dick chose his five men, and they dropped down one after
the other through the trapdoor in the floor, and followed him on
hands and knees along the little tunnel under the ground.

These subterranean galleries in the wild and woolly West are very
simply and easily contrived. A trench, some four feet deep and as
many wide, is dug in the soil from the house, the floor made hard
with concrete or something similar, and the sides boarded up and
over. Then the earth and sods of grass are replaced.

As a rule, the exit is in the middle of a thick clump of bushes some
forty or fifty feet from the hut, and may be used as a rifle-pit, of
course, in case of an attack on the house, the inmates contriving
thus to take the assailants in the rear.

Crawling along on all fours in the inky blackness of the tunnel,
Sergeant Dick came to a similar trapdoor to that he had descended.
Faint rays of light penetrated through cracks in it.

He pushed upward upon it, and it rose on hinges. Standing upright
within the aperture, he flashed an electric torch he had been given
by Inspector Medhurst, and saw that he was within a small cave, the
mouth of which was covered over outside by a thick mass of creeper,
through which, however, silvery light faintly struggled.

The moon had peeped out through a break in the clouds and was
flooding the plain outside with its ghostly radiance.

Dick scrambled out of the hole, and, turning to the back of the
cave, proceeded to flash his torch over it.

All at once he switched off the light, and, stooping over the trap
and the trooper getting upon his feet in it, whispered:

“S’sh, I heard something. They are coming, I believe--our quarry!
Bid the others come out softly.”

A noise as of heavily booted feet on hard rock had reached his
quick, trained ear. It came not from outside the cave, _but from the
roof at the back_.

Or was it only his fancy that it did?

Silently the troopers drew themselves up out of the hole in the cave
floor, and lowered the trap in place again behind them. The
moon-light, which entered through the interstices of the creeper
marking the entrance to the cave, was just sufficient to show each
man his neighbor’s dim silhouette or outline.

The noise without or beyond the cave continued, and grew louder, now
changing to the sounds that a man makes in climbing a ladder--the
sound of heavy boots clumping up wooden rungs.

And then to the amazement and momentary superstitious horror of the
troopers a bright light shot into the cave above a ledge close to
the roof at the back!

The light grew stronger, and danced about, accompanied by a rubbing,
rustling noise, then resolved itself into a glowing orb, which moved
about on top of the shelf and almost immediately turned its back, so
to speak, on the cave.

“I’m all right now, Martha,” said a gruff voice. “Here’s the torch
if you wants it, and shove the ladder along.”

Sergeant Dick and his fellow-troopers were all standing around the
cave, with rifles at the ready and eyes riveted upon that lighted
shelf over their heads. They were invisible in the darkness to the
fellow on the ledge. He had his own light in his eyes for one thing,
and, as related, he did not flash his torch around the cave but
handed it back to his companion in the inner depths.

His dark, shapeless figure could just be discerned in the halo of
the torch, squirming and pulling at something within another little
tunnel measuring about three feet in diameter.

The end of a ladder protruded from this second tunnel.

He and his companion were pulling it through, and he now proceeded
to lower it to the floor of the cave.

As he placed it in position, Sergeant Dick sprang forward, revolver
in hand, and bounded swiftly up it.

The young police officer’s swiftness, however, was almost a case of
more haste less speed. For the ladder, insecurely set half turned
under him. But he saved himself by clutching the shelf of rock with
his left hand, and luckily the ladder did not slip aside, so that he
was not thrown off it.

He promptly grabbed then with his left hand at the man, even as the
latter uttered a yell of fright and made to wriggle back inside the
tunnel.

Sergeant Dick caught the man by the collar, and, holding him
tightly, sprang up the remaining rungs of the ladder and thrust his
head, shoulders, and revolver into the tunnel at the second human
form he could dimly perceive within it by the light of the electric
torch.

“Keep still, you in there, or I shoot,” he roared. “Keep as you are.
Put your hands in front of you. I’ve got the drop on you, as you can
see. Come up, men some of you, quick, and relieve me of the husband
here.”

Three of the troopers sprang up the ladder behind him, while the
other two held it firm. Bill, or “Bud” Seymour, too amazed,
apparently, to be able to offer any resistance, was hauled down from
the shelf, neck and crop, and head first, by the three troopers,
allowing the sergeant to crawl into the narrow tunnel and lay hold
of Martha Seymour.

Fierce and bold as the woman was in the ordinary way, she had not
dared to disobey John Dick’s mandate to lie still and keep where she
was. As a matter of fact, she, like her husband, seemed to have her
energies paralyzed--to be bereft of the power of volition or action
by the unexpected attack.

Sergeant Dick, too, had promptly snatched the electric torch from
the outstretched hand and was shining the light blindingly in her
bewildered, horror-stricken eyes.

The tunnel was so narrow the pair had had to wriggle along it on
their stomachs and her prone position was therefore also against
her.

Leaning still farther in, Sergeant Dick grasped her by the wrist
now, and, backing and exerting all his strength, began to pull her
bodily out of the tunnel.

He had got her half out of it when two of the troopers came to his
aid, and, between them, they dragged her helplessly forth on to the
shelf, then bore her down the ladder to the cave floor.

She was dressed as a man, and in the dark it really would have been
hard to tell that she was not one. Like her husband, she was big and
burly, and her face was red and coarse, and bloated even worse than
his, while her eyes and mouth were hard and cruel-looking, whereas
his were weakly vicious.

They both wore overcoats, “wide-awake” hats, and topboots.

“So you’ve got us, have ye? Well, what are ye goin’ to do with us
now you’ve caught us?” asked the woman with an attempt at mockery,
as if she entertained some faint hope that their captors did not
associate them with the dreaded White Hood gang, or might very
easily be imposed upon. “Who do you think ye’ve got hold of, anyway?
What fules you all are! Don’t you know us? Yon’s Bill Seymour, and
I’m his wife.”

“We are quite aware of that, Mrs. Seymour, and we also know you to
be two of the White Hood gang. You two are alone, I take it. There
are no more of you coming through that interesting little tunnel?”

“Curse you! I recognizes you. You are the police sergeant we was--”

The woman stopped and bit her tongue, in evident concern at having
so unequivocally betrayed herself.

“Why don’t you finish, Mrs. Seymour? Whom you and your ruffianly
fellow-rustlers were going to hang, when my comrades here came up so
unexpectedly and timely.”

“Curse you! Oh, curse you!” was all the infuriated and mortified
woman could find to say.

Her husband broke out into bitter reproaches against her, for having
let her tongue run away with her and betray them both as it had
done.

Sergeant Dick sent one of the troopers across the open space outside
the cave to the hut to fetch Inspector Medhurst, and that officer
came quickly. Needless to say, he was delighted over the capture.

“Search their pockets, men,” he ordered. “We may find evidence upon
them of their own guilt and the identities of their late
companions.”

A brace of automatic pistols was found upon either prisoner. The
pair had already been relieved of their rifles of course.

And then one of the troopers, searching Bill Seymour, found in an
inner pocket a folded scrap of paper, which he handed to Medhurst.

The inspector unfolded it eagerly, and flashed an electric torch
upon it.

In a reddish fluid, presumably blood, was scrawled upon it:

“To old Alf Arnold and his little lot at ‘Water Carstle,’--We was
fules to let you and your sons orf so light, and, now that cussed
policeman who was a-stayin’ wid you ’as escaped us, we believes some
of you set the traps on to us. So, look out! The White Hoods hev
sworn revenge upon all on you, and we ull burn the b’ilin’ lot on
you one night afore long in your bloomin’ ‘Water Carstle.’ Ef you
did beat orf the redskins, you won’t us, so, again we says, look
out!”

Inspector Medhurst read this precious effusion out aloud.

“H’m! Ha!” he observed. “We must take means at once, sergeant, to
protect the Arnolds and entrap the rest of these ruffians around
‘Water Castle.’ They may strike there at once when they learn of the
arrest of these two. Take your five men again, now, and explore this
second tunnel--see where it leads to. If you come upon the trail of
others of the band, let me know at once, and we’ll try to run the
wretches down. Let me know immediately in any case what’s on the
other side of this tunnel.”

John Dick saluted without a word, and, bidding the five troopers
follow him again, mounted the ladder and wriggled head first, inside
the hole behind the rocky shelf.




CHAPTER XXVII--THE CLEW OF THE LAMP


The tunnel in the rock proved to be some ten feet long. It was
blocked at the end by small-sized bowlders piled upon each other.

Clearing them aside, Sergeant Dick put out his head. He saw a deep
gully, or dried-up water-course, ascending at right angles to him,
at a gentle gradient, between overhanging cliffs which only
permitted of a faint glimpse of the night sky.

Sergeant Dick told the man behind him what he could see, and to pass
the word back along their line to Inspector Medhurst. Then he
proceeded to climb out of the tunnel.

His men followed him; and they started searching the ground at their
feet for tracks.

Where the ground was soft were innumerable cattle and sheep tracks,
and a few horse tracks. Nearly all of these led upwards. One or two
tracks, nearly obliterated by the others and by rain and wind and
dust, led downwards.

“These downward tracks are weeks old, that’s plain,” said Sergeant
Dick. “The others are more recent, but still all the cattle tracks
are several days old. It’s plain to me--”

“Dick!” It was the inspector’s voice. And, raising his head with a
respectful “Yes, sir,” Dick saw Medhurst wriggling out of the tunnel
mouth above them.

“You’ve found tracks?”

“Yes, sir. Mostly cattle tracks. It’s pretty evident, inspector,
that this gully is the secret way to and from the gang’s
duffing-yard, which is above us. Judging from the tracks they can’t
have taken any of the stolen cattle out for some time--several
weeks--so we ought to make a grand haul.”

“I’m coming through with the rest of the men, except Morton and
Geddes, who are guarding our prisoners.”

The inspector and the other five police troopers climbed down beside
their comrades; and Medhurst said they would first ascend the gully
to the rustlers’ duffing-yard.

Falling into line, the troopers followed their two officers up the
winding water-course. It took them a good twenty minutes to come to
its upper end. Then they suddenly debouched upon a fairly level
expanse of ground, and, beyond a slight intervening ridge, they
looked into the same cup-shaped valley which Sergeant John Dick had
discovered from the other or southern side of the range.

And his skill as a tracker was also verified; for there, sure
enough, were the horses, steers, and sheep he had seen before dotted
about the valley, darker blurs against the dark background in the
faint light of the stars and overclouded moon.

“Excellent!” exclaimed the inspector. “This is a coup. The gang
evidently recognized the hopelessness of getting the beasts away
before our coming, and decided to consult only their own safety by
getting back to their homes as quickly as possible.”

“We may find something that may tell us who the rest of them are in
the log-hut on the other side of the valley, inspector,” said
Sergeant Dick.

“Quite so,” agreed Medhurst. “Yes, we’ll see what the hut contains.
Be in readiness for an ambush, men! There’s no saying that some of
the gang haven’t entrenched themselves in the valley, although I
don’t think it is likely. Spread out more, and walk stooping,
carrying your rifles at the ready!”

But they crossed the valley to the other side without any
molestation, except that they disturbed some of the sleeping horses
and cattle.

The moon shone out bright and full again from a fairly clear sky as
they drew near the “lean-to,” which, as its name explains, was built
up against the cliff.

The door stood half open! But still, fearful that this might only be
a ruse to lure him and his _posse_ into some diabolically arranged
death-trap, Inspector Medhurst called a halt and asked for a
volunteer to go forward and make sure that the hut was empty.

“I’ll go, inspector,” Sergeant Dick answered, promptly.

Medhurst would have been exceedingly sorry to have lost his capable
young subordinate, but he did not like to pass him over for one of
the troopers.

“Very good! I don’t need to tell you to be careful, I think.”

John Dick advanced, bending nearly double, and ready to drop flat to
the earth at the first gleam of a rifle at either of the two windows
in sight, or any suspicious sign within the half-open door.

He was within twenty feet of the hut when his keen sense of smell
detected the strong, unpleasant odor of an oil-lamp burning badly.

For a moment he hesitated, half scenting in this a trap for their
destruction. Then he determined to risk it, and flew swiftly forward
to the door of the hut.

But instead of at once thrusting it wide open, as five men out of
six would naturally have done in the circumstances, he did not touch
the door at all. He simply stepped half round it, and flashed his
electric torch about the room.

And then he saw what a terrible trap had been laid for them--_how a
touch upon the door would have blown him to atoms_!

Behind the half-open door was a barrel on end, three-parts full of
gunpowder, as he could see through a hole knocked in its top. And
balanced on a strip of wood across the hole was a vilely smoking
lamp screened about with a square of cardboard so that its light
only showed upon the roof.

Just touching the cardboard screen was a short plank of wood resting
on heaped-up boxes, its other end set against the door.

If the door had been pushed back, the plank must have been, and the
lamp overturned into the gunpowder, and any one entering would never
have known what had hurt him--not in this world at least.

Sergeant Dick felt himself go cold all over, as he comprehended the
awful doom which might so easily have been his.

He stepped forward promptly, however, gingerly lifted the lamp from
its dangerous position, and set it upon the table, turning it higher
to put an end to its vile aroma.

It smoked badly, and the chimney was all black. He therefore took it
outside and blew it out, and called to his comrades to come up.

When they did so, and he pointed out to Inspector Medhurst the
diabolical trap that had been laid for them, one and all the
troopers indulged in furious anathemas against the dastardly White
Hoods.

“Look round the hut, lads, and see what you can find,” ordered their
leader.

“The lamp, I think, will prove a clew, inspector,” quietly said
Sergeant Dick. “As a matter of fact, I have seen it before, and that
quite recently.”

“You have--where?”

“_At ‘Water Castle.’_ Inspector, I believe the Arnold family make up
the rest of the gang of White Hoods. I have believed so ever since
you rescued me from the gang’s hands this evening, but I had no real
proof beyond my own vague suspicions until now. The leader’s voice
it was that first made me suspect the family. I could take my oath
it was _Aunt Kate’s--Mrs. Arnold’s_! And I know that the fellow who
climbed the tree was Abner Arnold; while this lamp I can swear to
having seen in Aaron Arnold’s bedroom during the siege of the
‘castle’ by the Ogalcrees.”

“Thunder! You don’t say! But--but what about the letter written in
blood we found on Seymour, threatening the gang’s vengeance against
all at ‘Water Castle’? And, again, weren’t all the male members of
the family with you when you were captured by the gang? Ah, I see, I
see! You think that the letter was only an artful ruse to avert
suspicion, and Old Alf and his sons promptly disguised
themselves--donned white hoods and smocks--when you were
blindfolded.”

“Exactly, sir! And put on their primitive armor, too. It was
probably hidden, close by the scene of our hold-up by their
womenfolk.”

“But--but, good heavens, you don’t mean to infer that all the women
of the family are also mixed up in this? That, that lovely girl--Old
Alf’s niece--and his daughter, that weak-minded, poor girl--Jenny I
think they call her--have helped in the atrocities the gang have
committed, and could lend themselves to--to such a diabolical scheme
of vengeance as you have just frustrated?”

“Don’t ask me, sir--don’t ask me,” John Dick replied in such a
heartwrung voice as made Medhurst look surprisedly at him.

Then a look of sympathetic intelligence swiftly crossed the
inspector’s face.

“Some of the women of the family are in the gang, undoubtedly, as I
told you before, sir, but--but it is just possible that the--the two
you mention, the niece and the daughter, are innocent of all
complicity. God only grant it be so,” he added in tones not meant
for his superior’s ears.

“Yes,” John Dick went on, “it’s pretty plain to me, now, how they
worked the oracle--how the gang worked matters to-night. As soon as
the male members of the family and I had gone off this evening, Aunt
Kate and the two daughters-in-law, I should say, took a canoe and
made for the north side of the hills or cliffs. The foreman of
Lonewater ranch told you that he saw _three_ White Hoods riding
round the north side of the range towards the Seymours’ place. They
were Aunt Kate and the two daughters-in-law, without a doubt. The
three had a hiding-place on the lakeside where they assumed their
ghost-like disguise, and, of course, the two Seymours made up the
five who held us up, round the other side of the range.”

“And by riding this way, up the gully and across the valley here,
they might very easily get to the waterside before you. You
naturally moved slowly and warily, to guard against falling into an
ambush or warning any of the gang on watch.”

“That is so, sir. And the squatter and his four sons would just
bring up the number of the bandits to what it was when they were
going to hang me.”




CHAPTER XXVIII--THE RETURN TO “WATER CASTLE”


The “lean-to” consisted of two compartments, and the walls of both
were furnished with hooks, for slinging hammocks apparently, though
there were no hammocks now in the place.

In fact, save for an old stove, which was evidently a home-made
contrivance, there was nothing to be found in either compartment,
until Sergeant Dick said he would take a final look-round.

He peeped upon some shelves in the inner room and spied a fragment
of writing-paper, plainly overlooked.

Opening it out and shining a light upon it, the inspector and
Sergeant Dick saw that it was apparently a scrap of a letter.

This is what they read:

    “... be foolish to touch their stock, Bud, old chap.
    Anyway, we will turn out in full force to-nite, the
    eight on us, and you and your wife. Muriel and Jenny
    be going to Paquita Springs this afternoon, so the
    coast will be quite clear. We will not need to trick
    them as usual.

    “’Till I see you, to-nite, at the hut.

                                 “Your true pal,
                                           “Alf Arnold.”

“That clinches it, sergeant,” said the inspector with grim
satisfaction, carefully folding the scrap of paper and putting it
away in his notebook. “This bit of paper would hang the Squatter of
the Lake, I should say, or at any rate get him a good stretch in
jail, even if you were unable to swear to the lamp, or we couldn’t
trace those who sold it.”

“And--and it would seem to show that Muriel and Jenny--the niece and
daughter, I mean--are not concerned in the outrages of the gang, are
wholly innocent of all complicity in the lawlessness. ‘We will not
need to trick them as usual,’ the letter says, ‘and as they are
going to Paquita Springs the coast will be quite clear.’”

“Yes, yes, it is evident those two girls are innocent and know
nothing whatever of the villainy of their relations and the
Seymours. Come now, we will hurry back the way we came, proceed at
once to ‘Water Castle’ and try to effect the arrest of Old Alf and
his lot.”

“One moment, inspector! I have an idea by which we may capture them
without bloodshed--a thing that I have grave doubt we will achieve
unless we resort to some ruse. You know the strength of ‘Water
Castle,’ and the character of the squatter and his sons, to say
nothing of his wife?”

“What is your plan?”

“First that we do not disappoint them, in the hope of presently
hearing a big ‘boom’ from this quarter. Let us leave a time-fuse to
blow the hut up when we are back across the valley.”

“A good idea. We will do it. If the Arnolds believe they have blown
us all to pieces, we ought to be able to capture them easily. They
will take no precautions against our coming.”

“Exactly! I will tell you the rest of my plan for taking them, as we
go.”

While Sergeant Dick and the inspector laid the fuse, the troopers
were all told to drive the cattle, horses, and sheep to the farther
side of the valley, well away from the force of the explosion.

Sergeant Dick and Medhurst then quitted the hut, laying their powder
trail right across the valley. At the top of the gully the troopers
rejoined them. Then Sergeant Dick applied a lighted match to the
long, thin trail of powder.

With a hissing splutter the tiny red flash ran down the slope of the
hillside and went zigzag-ging away across the valley until it looked
no more than a fast-traveling, tiny red star in the darkness.

It neared the farther side, and all prepared for the detonation.

Sure enough it came.

A great, lurid sheet of flame lit the night under the opposite
cliffs, there was a thunderous roar, echoed and reechoed by the
hills around, and the solid rock under them shook and trembled.

Then the police turned their backs on the cup-shaped valley, from
which it was not possible without human aid that any of the stolen
animals could escape; for the top of the gully, we have forgotten to
mention, was closed by a high gate, secured by a padlock.

Descending past where they had first entered the gully, the party
came almost immediately--on just turning an angle in the cliff--to a
solid wall of rock through which the gully was continued in the
shape of a wide natural tunnel or cave.

They passed inside this, and saw an opening before them not more
than four or five feet wide and six feet high. It was covered over
outside with a mass of an evergreen creeper, which effectually
masked it in like manner to the cave in which the Seymours had been
captured.

Thrusting the creeper aside, Sergeant Dick and Inspector Medhurst
emerged on the prairie within not more than two or three hundred
yards of the Seymours’ hut.

“Oh! ow! ow! Ye are ghosts come back from the grave to haunt us!”
was the yelled greeting they got, as they pushed open the door of
the hut, from the two Seymours, who squirmed and writhed in the
chairs they were tied to.

“You see, inspector? They naturally concluded we had fallen victims
to their horrible trap and been blown to atoms, all of us,” said
Sergeant Dick, grimly.

“Ah, they had laid a trap for you, then, sir. I suspected as much
from the way they were chortling to themselves after we heard that
explosion,” said one of the two troopers who had been left guarding
the prisoners.

“They’ll chortle in a different way after their trial,” grimly
responded Medhurst. “Of course, had your murder-trap succeeded, you
vile wretches, there would have been nothing to prove that it wasn’t
an accident, precipitated by ourselves in searching the hut. As it
is, that little scheme will prove a very damning factor against you
all.”

A start was soon made now for the lake, all quitting the hut and
mounting. The two prisoners were set upon their own horses, which
had been left in the stable all night.

With their reins tied together and linked up on either side to a
trooper’s saddle-bow, the pair were placed in the middle of the
troopers. Then, at an easy trot, with the horses’ hoofs muffled, the
party rode round the hilly spurs on the northern side of the range,
and threaded their way through the woods down to the lake edge.

Sergeant Dick explained his plan for the capture of the Arnolds, as
he and Inspector Medhurst rode at the head of the cavalcade. In
accordance with it, they were no sooner at the waterside and in view
of the lights of the “castle” and the ruddy reflection in the placid
surface of the lake, than he fired three shots into the air.

As the reader may need reminding, three shots meant “Want to come
off shore,” and was the signal used by the Arnolds and all their
visitors.

They had a full code of such signals, which all their friends knew
and employed as occasion demanded. Four shots--two rapidly, and
then, after a moment, two more in quick succession--for instance,
indicated that danger was to be apprehended from some direction.

On his giving the signal, Sergeant Dick and his comrades of the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police dismounted, and hid themselves behind
trees and bushes. They had come to the identically same
landing-place where the Ogalcrees had ambushed him, on landing for
the first time on that shore from the ark.

The two Seymours had been gagged to prevent them giving any alarm,
and moreover, tied to trees.

Hardly had these measures been taken when, through his binoculars,
Inspector Medhurst saw the dark shadow of the ark slowly moving away
from the verandah of the “castle” and making its way out of the
palisaded “dock.”

“There are sure to be some of the menfolk, if not all five, on the
craft, men,” whispered Medhurst, explaining his subordinate’s plan
now to the troopers. “The sergeant is a fine mimic, as I can bear
witness, and he is going to imitate ‘Bud’ Seymour’s melodious voice,
and thus lure whoever’s aboard right up to the landing-place. As
soon as the scow bumps, every man of you must rush forward, without
firing a shot, and get aboard. We don’t want the rest of the family
alarmed by a shot. You know the strength of the ‘castle,’ or, rather
you don’t know it as Sergeant Dick does, and he says it would be
almost impossible to storm it in the face of anything like a fierce
fire from within. The Indians found that out to their cost. The
sergeant says the floor of the front room drops like a trap on the
pulling of a lever, and any one bursting in recklessly may therefore
expect to be given a distinct cooler.”

As already mentioned more than once, the scow, for all its awkward
build, sailed swiftly. It was soon within hailing distance of the
shore, and a man’s voice, the voice of Amos, bawled across the
water:

“Who is it?”

“Bud--Bud Seymour,” Sergeant Dick at once answered, mimicking that
old scoundrel’s mode of speech exactly.

On that, the ark came on, and the peering eyes in the bushes made
out four human forms in the forepart of the craft--two men and two
women.

Sergeant Dick’s heart beat faster.

What if one of the women were she whom he loved--whom he loved still
in spite of his late ghastly fear that she might be implicated in
the awful outrages of the gang and even in their attempt to put him
out of the way by hanging!

When close inshore, the quartet on the ark dropped an anchor astern,
and then, paying out the rope, proceeded to propel the craft, with
the two long sweeps, towards the shore.

By this maneuver, as previously explained, in case of treachery they
could haul off-shore again quickly, by dragging on the anchor rope.

Nearer and yet nearer glided the unwieldy craft, and Sergeant Dick’s
sharp eyes, trained by long practice to seeing well in the dark,
made out Muriel and her cousin Jenny standing just within the cabin
door. They were holding the anchor-rope, brought through the other
doors, ready to haul on it. The family’s isolation taught them to
expect treachery and alarms from the most unexpected quarters.

Amos and his brother Abner were at the sweeps, of course.

Sergeant Dick had assumed Bill Seymour’s hat and coat, and kept
behind a small bush so as to hide his lower man. He concealed his
face by turning the coat-collar up about his chin and drawing the
hat well down over his brows.

Nearer, nearer! Not a yard separated the boat from the landing-place
now.

Bump!

Immediately, Sergeant Dick rushed forward, pointing a pair of
pistols at Amos and Abner.

“Hands up, both of you!” he bawled. “You are our prisoners!”

The pair stood as if petrified, and the two girls likewise; for all
four recognized him in spite of his disguise.

He leaped into the scow, and, with a rush, his fellow
police-troopers swarmed after him, all with pointed revolvers.




CHAPTER XXIX--THE FAILURE TO SURPRISE “WATER CASTLE”


Amos and Abner were each in the hands of half a dozen troopers in
less time than it takes to relate. Then, as terrified screams burst
from Muriel and Jenny, Abner gave vent to a howl that seemed hardly
human and gasped affrightedly:

“They are ghosts, ghosts, ghosts! We are lost, Amos!”

“We are indeed, you fool!” spluttered his brother, struggling
frenziedly now to free himself from the dozen muscular hands
clutching him, “for you ’ave betrayed us.”

Then a gag was forced into the mouth of each of the two young
desperadoes, and their hands were dragged behind their backs and
handcuffed so.

“Stop your screaming, girls! Hold your tongues or we shall be forced
to gag you also,” cried Inspector Medhurst.

At this threat Jenny was silent, save for a loud, terrified panting.
Muriel had only uttered one involuntary scream upon the rush of the
police.

“What is the meaning of this, policemen?” she now demanded,
hoarsely. “Sergeant Dick, have you all gone crazy that--that you
attack us--make prisoners of my cousins in this way and that
you--you have disguised yourself in that way--are personating old
Mr. Seymour?”

“Miss Arnold, an explanation is certainly due to you and your cousin
Jenny,” replied Dick, sorrowfully, as he put his pistols back in his
belt. “You have both been cruelly deceived by your relatives. It
grieves me very much to have to tell you, Miss Muriel, that your two
cousins there, as well as their brothers and father, are members of
the dreaded White Hood Gang.”

“Impossible!” gasped Muriel, while Jenny stood as if transfixed.
“Oh, that is too absurd!”

“It is true, Miss Arnold,” put in Inspector Medhurst. “Your cousin
yonder took us for ghosts, and his brother cried out that he had
betrayed them. So he had, for it was fairly good proof--his taking
us for ghosts--that he believed we had all been killed by a horrible
trap set for us by him and his brothers and the two Seymours up
among the hills.”

“Oh, it is impossible--impossible! I cannot believe it of them,”
panted Muriel, sinking helplessly upon the seat under the bulwark of
the scow.

“You will oblige us, ladies, by going inside the cabin and keeping
silent,” continued Inspector Medhurst. “If your uncle and cousins
_are_ innocent, Muriel Arnold, they will be afforded every chance of
clearing themselves by the law of the land, provided they submit
quietly. Haverty and Leclere, bring the Seymours aboard. Then we
will draw out and make for the ‘castle.’ Sergeant, will you take the
tiller, and steer?”

Gasping hard and staring wildly at each other, the two girls passed
inside the after-cabin, then stood embracing for mutual support,
while the police-troopers brought the Seymours aboard and hauled on
the anchor-rope, pulling the ark off-shore.

Amos and Abner had been thrown helplessly handcuffed and gagged into
two of the bunks in the fore-cabin. Bud Seymour was put in another
bunk and his wife was bound to the mast inside the cabin.

As the ark drew near “Water Castle,” Sergeant Dick and his
fellow-policemen saw that the gate in the “dockyard” palisading
stood wide, just as they expected it would be. The way in up to the
verandah or landing-stage was clear.

But standing half within, half without the door of the “castle,”
peering out anxiously, was old Alf, rifle in hand, while faces were
visible at two of the windows facing them. There were no lights
showing in the place; all had been extinguished, and most of the
windows in sight appeared to be shuttered.

“They heard the girls’ screams, and are on their guard, sergeant,”
Inspector Medhurst called in a low voice from the after-door of the
ark.

“I’m afraid so, sir. Sound travels far over water, and this lake is
famous for its remarkable echoes,” Sergeant Dick answered as
cautiously, turning the ark’s nose a degree so as to skirt the
palisading to the open gate.

“Ark, ahoy! Anything wrong? That you, Amos--Abner?” Old Man Alf
bawled to them.

Sergeant Dick was still wearing “Bud” Seymour’s hat and coat, and
again mimicking that old reprobate’s voice, shouted back:

“Of course, it’s Amos and Abner, and ‘Bud’ Seymour, too, a-comin’ to
see you, ole hoss! What do you think’s wrong?”

Old Alf evidently consulted with others of the garrison, but he
still seemed suspicious as he called out again:

“Amos, Abner, are you there? What did them there screams mean? We
heerd them right enough. Muriel--Jenny, is it all right wi’ you?”

“No, father, it isn’t,” shrilled Jenny on the instant, rushing to
the edge of the squared bow. “The police are here, and they are
after you and the boys. They’ve got Amos and Abner, and the two
Seymours, prisoners in the cabin. Those you see are police wearing
their hats.”

She shouted the words rapidly--all in one breath.

Muriel gasped in dismay and ran and clapped a hand over her mouth,
too late. She fought to free her mouth and shout something more, as
Inspector Medhurst and three of the troopers rushed forth from the
cabin and seized and dragged her and Muriel within it again.

“Oh, Jenny! Why were you so foolish? They will fight to the bitter
end now. I know they will--your father and brothers. You have sealed
their doom.”

“She has that, for, as I said, if they resist, we will show no
mercy--we cannot show any,” exclaimed Inspector Medhurst. Then he
stepped to the door again, and called out:

“Surrender, Arnold! Submit quietly, and you will all have the
benefit of a fair trial. Refuse, and resist us at your peril! You
know the penalty of defying us--the police.”

Old Alf had vanished within the door, which was now closed, and the
other faces were no longer visible at the windows. All the windows
in sight presented only their armored, loopholed screens.

Suddenly one of the screens was thrown open, and Aunt Kate’s voice
boomed forth, even as the bow of the ark scraped one of the gate
posts in the palisading, and the clumsy vessel swung slowly round to
enter the gate.

“Let my two sons and daughter whom you have prisoners come on to the
verandah and talk to us, and we’ll think about surrenderin’.”

Inspector Medhurst did not reply, but stepped back inside the
fore-cabin. He called through the after one for the two troopers
with Sergeant Dick to keep close behind the tiller-shield, with him.

“Stand on up to the house and lay us alongside the verandah,
sergeant,” he added.

“Do you hear me, you policemen?” roared the lion-like old woman
again. “Give my sons and daughter their liberty, let ’em join us,
and we’ll then talk about surrenderin’.”

“Your two sons aboard with us are prisoners, and as such they will
remain,” Medhurst answered, after another moment or two’s pause
during which Sergeant Dick ran the scow swiftly and deftly alongside
the verandah. “I will hold no further parley with you than to ask
you once more, ‘Do you surrender or do you not?’”

“Curse you, we will fight to the death!” roared out the voice of
Aaron.

An automatic pistol cracked rapidly from the open window, and bullet
after bullet from the weapon clanged against and ricocheted off the
steel tiller-shield, behind which Sergeant Dick and Troopers Bell
and Watts were standing huddled, showing not as much as an elbow,
fortunately for them.

“Hold your fire, troopers! Hold your fire!” bawled Inspector
Medhurst. “Within the ‘castle,’ there! Alf Arnold, listen to me. I
have no wish to fire on the house, as you have women with you. Let
them come out--your wife and two daughters-in-law--then, if you men
will not surrender, so much the worse for you. Send the women out,
anyhow, first of all.”

Abel, the other son in the house, had been quick to join in the
firing at the ark. But both desperadoes now ceased shooting, and a
silence intervened, broken at length by Aunt Kate’s voice, calling
out:

“No, no! Let Deb and Bella go, but my place is here. I will not
leave you, Alf, nor my brave lads.”

“They only want you to open the door so’s they can make a rush in.
Don’t be gulled, men,” shrilled the voice of Bella, Abel’s wife.

“We will take no such advantage of you,” the inspector bawled back,
“but, if you doubt my word, lower the women through your trapdoor
into a canoe.”

Another longish pause, broken only by murmuring voices within the
“castle”; and then old Alf Arnold called out:

“Very well, we will send the women out through the trapdoor.”

Aunt Kate and her daughters-in-law could be heard still fiercely
protesting against quitting their husband’s sides. But the men’s
arguments evidently prevailed, for presently the occupants of the
ark could hear noises under the “castle,” which told them the women
were being put into one of the canoes.

Sergeant Dick and Troopers Bell and Watts, by stooping and peeping
round the side of the tiller-screen, could see, through the piles
and cross-timbering under the verandah, the three women being
lowered in turn through the trap in the central passage of the
“castle” into a canoe drawn up under it. There were two other canoes
moored close by.




CHAPTER XXX--THE END OF THE WHITE HOODS, AND OF THE STORY


“Thank heaven for that mercy, Jenny. Your mother and sisters-in-law
will be out of the fighting,” panted Muriel.

As the words left her lips there came a loud “view-hallo!” from the
direction of the southern end of the lake, and, glancing
thitherwards, Sergeant Dick and Inspector Medhurst saw a dozen or
more canoes and rafts making for them.

For a moment the inmates of the ark believed that they were taken in
the rear by Indians, broken out on the warpath again. But the next
moment torches burst into flame in the leading canoes and revealed
that the new comers were cowboys and settlers from the surrounding
district. The red coat and Stetson hat of a police-trooper showed up
conspicuously in the foremost canoe under the bright torchlight.

Medhurst and Sergeant Dick recognized the man as the trooper who had
been dispatched for reënforcements immediately after Dick’s rescue
from the White Hoods.

Hails were exchanged between the troopers in the ark and the
would-be avengers in the canoes; explanations were called for, and
given freely.

“It means that we’ve rounded up and cornered the last of the White
Hoods, men,” Inspector Medhurst shouted to those in the canoes. “Old
Man Arnold and his sons, his wife and two daughters-in-law with the
two Seymours, ‘Bud’ and his wife, formed the entire gang, as we
discovered. They tried to blow us up in the hills, where they’ve got
a secret duffing-yard stocked full of cattle, sheep, and horses, all
awaiting identification now. But we escaped the diabolical plot,
thanks be, and here we are with Amos and Abner Arnold and the two
Seymours prisoners, and just waiting for Mrs. Arnold and the other
women to come out before falling on and capturing or wiping out the
last three male members of the band--Old Alf and his two eldest
sons.”

A yell of vengeful rage and fierce execration went up from the
canoes on the words; and the cowboys and settlers in the canoes were
all for attacking the “castle” from the other three sides in
conjunction with the police in the ark.

But Inspector Medhurst again called out:

“No, no, men, you must keep at a distance. This is our affair--for
us police to settle. And you wouldn’t rob us of any of the glory of
the capture of the place? We are strongly entrenched inside this
vessel, while you’d have no more chance in your canoes and on those
rafts than the redskins had in their late siege of the place. I
cannot allow you to throw away your lives in any such foolish
attack. You would all be wiped out and not be able to accomplish
anything.”

The canoe containing Aunt Kate and her two daughters-in-law, Bella
and Deborah, now came up to the little gate in the timbering under
the “castle.” Unlocking the padlock upon it, the women opened it and
paddled out.

“You had better come aboard the ark, Mrs. Arnold,” called the
Inspector.

The women were nothing loath to do so, dreading with reason the
reception they would get from their infuriated neighbors in the
canoes and on the rafts. Every man’s hand was against the White
Hoods, and all belonging to them; their atrocities had enraged every
one, English, French, and Indian.

As the three women stepped aboard and passed by Sergeant Dick behind
the tiller-screen, they each gave him a look of awful hate and
vengeful longing.

Barely had the cabin door closed upon them than from three of the
front windows of the “castle” three rifles rang out and as many
bullets clanged again against the tiller-screen covering Sergeant
Dick and Troopers Bell and Watts.

The police still held their fire, but Sergeant Dick saw the
after-door of the ark open cautiously a few inches again, and
Inspector Medhurst peep round it and beckon to him--indicate by
jerking a finger that he and the two troopers were to move the
tiller-screen close up against the door.

This the trio promptly proceeded to do. They contrived to do so
without exposing themselves in any way, but caused two of the
outlaws in the “castle” again to blaze away furiously at their
shield.

When it was alongside the after-door, Medhurst put into Dick’s hands
a small barrel or keg, with a candle thrust into the open bunghole.

“Sergeant,” he whispered, “here is a keg of gunpowder. Slip under
the verandah in the canoe and put it just beneath the door, then
light the candle and get back as smartly as you can. We shall have
to push off promptly to escape the force of the explosion. Will you
do it?”

“Certainly, inspector. Where did you find the keg?”

“Inside one of the store-cupboards. The sight of it suggested the
idea.”

“One moment, sir! Would it not be better to blow in the western or
eastern wall? You remember what I told you about the drop-floor in
the front room? The gap would want some getting over, if they let it
down, even if we got in the front as the Ogalcrees did, in the face
of their fire from the inner rooms.”

“Just as you like, sergeant. Very well, let it be the western wall.”

Sergeant Dick, hugging the keg of gunpowder under his left arm,
dropped on his knees and crawled round the farther end of the
tiller-screen. His head was below the level of the verandah, and so
he was hidden from the fierce, watching eyes at the “castle”
loopholes.

Wriggling noiselessly and cautiously over the scow’s bulwark, he
stepped on to the cross-timbering between the piles supporting the
verandah, and the next moment he had dodged through the open gate,
by which the three Mrs. Arnolds had come out in the canoe, and was
under the verandah.

The canoe was alongside the gate, but tied to the stern of the scow.
He stepped into it and cast off the painter; then, leaving the
paddles lying where they were in the canoe at his feet, he
soundlessly began to work the canoe along the inside of the piles by
shifting his hands along the timbering.

In this way he worked himself under the house itself and over to the
west side. He set the little keg against one of the piles supporting
the western wall, immediately between the two bedrooms on that
side--Aaron’s and Abel’s, as it happened. The keg fitted neatly in
the crook formed by the pile and a cross-brace.

Then he struck a match softly and lighted the candle in the
bunghole, immediately hurrying back diagonally in the canoe the way
he had come, for the gate.

He gained the opening and wriggled noiselessly back over the bulwark
of the scow. That the candle-fuse was still burning all right he
could see through the piles.

The next moment he was behind the tiller-screen and safe inside the
after-cabin, where, on hearing his report that the mine was set,
Inspector Medhurst at once gave orders for the ark to be thrust off
from the verandah. She had been hooked on to the piles with
boathooks, that was all, and the current, flowing southward, at once
began to drift her away from “Water Castle” back towards the gate of
the outer palisading or “dockyard.”

Sergeant Dick saw that none of the prisoners were in the
after-cabin, and concluded that they had all been kept from the
windows and in ignorance of what had been done.

Then it came--a great blinding, lurid flash, round and under the
house, a deafening bang! Bits of the roof and fragments of the
shattered wall and floor of the “castle” hurtled into the air and
fell splashing into the water around.

“Round to the side blown in, quick, men!” yelled Inspector Medhurst,
while all the women in the fore-cabin screamed in terror, to know
what had happened.

The troopers at the windows told them, and the three Mrs. Arnolds
indulged in the vilest abuse of Inspector Medhurst, Sergeant Dick,
and all the Royal Mounted Police in Canada.

Paying no heed to the vituperation, the police-troopers under their
two officers sailed the ark hurriedly past the verandah to the west
side, where they beheld a great gaping hole blown in the wall of the
“castle.” The hole showed the partition between the two bedrooms and
their communicating door, and was high enough and wide enough on
either side of it to allow of two horsemen riding through abreast.

A dense cloud of smoke was still pouring from the two rooms exposed,
and part of the flooring was gone, along with the piles and
cross-bracing that had supported it; so that, though the holes into
the bedrooms were so large, the aforesaid two horsemen would have
found it difficult to find any footing, to get inside.

But the police-troopers made nothing of such a difficulty. As
Sergeant Dick ran the ark close up against the shattered wall, they
all swarmed out of the after-cabin door beside him, revolvers in
hand. Then, led by him and Inspector Medhurst, they crowded to the
bulwark immediately opposite the gap, like bluejackets boarding an
enemy ship. Sergeant Dick headed the intrusion into Aaron’s bedroom,
the inspector that into Abel’s.

All the women, of course, had been shut up, without arms, in the
fore-cabin of the ark--locked inside it so that they could not get
out and interfere in any way.

As Sergeant Dick sprang through the hole in the wall the door in
front of him, leading into the central passage, was thrown open, and
the three Arnolds appeared, reeling like drunken men under the
unexpected shock of the shattering of their stronghold, and mad with
fury and despair.

Each of them gripped an automatic in either hand and looked more
like a demon than a human being, in the semi-gloom and dusty fog of
the place.

Sergeant Dick promptly flung himself on his knees. Simultaneously
all six weapons in front of him spoke rapidly, and the bullets went
whizzing over his head.

As by a miracle, none of the troopers behind him was struck down.
None, as it happened, was just in the line of fire, and, hurriedly
ducking and dodging to one side, they pelted back a quick return
fire, while Dick slipped swiftly to one side, dived out of the way
like a cat or some wild thing.

There were two ringing screams, and Aaron and Abel fell heavily
against their father, throwing the old man down. Then with a rush,
the police under Dick disarmed and seized the trio. Sergeant Dick
had not fired a shot--had had no need to--and he was glad in his
heart that he had not been obliged to do so, on Muriel’s account.

He did not wish to have the blood of any of her relatives on his
hands, even though shed in fair fight and in defense of law and
order.

Inspector Medhurst and those following came flocking through the
intervening door. But their aid was unnecessary. Aaron and Abel had
both been shot dead, and Old Man Arnold was dying.

“Inspector Medhurst, I would tell you something before I go,” Old
Alf exclaimed, with difficulty. “The girl Muriel is--is not my niece
at all, but--but your daughter. She is no relation of mine. You
believed your wife and child were killed by redskins. They were not.
It was I who stopped them, I and--and--Bud--I mean several others.
Your wife resisted us, and--and I shot her; and then we threw her
body over the cataract, and some of the others wanted to throw the
child after the mother. But my wife wouldn’t hear of that. Yes, she
was there--I’ve let it out now--but her saving the life of your
child should speak for her. She said she would adopt the
child--pretend it was my sister’s child, and we threw the little
thing’s hat and shawl after its mother, to make you believe it was
in the river too.”

“Great heavens! Is this true? Your supposed niece, my daughter--my
little Agnes?” cried Medhurst, staggered by the revelation, as well
he might be.

“It’s the gospel’s own truth, as I am a dying man, Medhurst,”
groaned the old bandit chief.

The next moment he had breathed his last.

His wife readily admitted that Muriel was Medhurst’s daughter, on
learning of her husband’s disclosure, and that he was dead and her
two eldest sons the same. The meeting between father and daughter we
shall not attempt to describe, beyond saying that both were too
stunned and affected by the dreadful happenings of the last hour,
their grim surroundings, to be very demonstrative. Indeed, Muriel
seemed too stunned by the news to quite grasp its import.

So the dreaded White Hood Gang was no more--broken and rounded up to
its very last member. The difficulty of bringing home any actual
murder or atrocity to the prisoners, as none of them turned King’s
evidence, resulted in their all escaping the death penalty and
receiving various terms of imprisonment instead.

Amos and Abner, however, within three months of their sentence,
attempted to break jail and were both mortally wounded by their
armed guards. As for “Bud,” or Bill, Seymour and Aunt Kate, they
both died in prison.

Eighteen months after Muriel or Agnes Medhurst had been restored to
her father, she was led to the altar-rails in the little backwoods
church of Paquita Springs by Inspector John Dick, for he was
sergeant no longer, having been promoted to control of a
far-stretching territory adjoining Lonewater for the prominent part
he had taken in the detection and rounding-up of the dreaded White
Hoods.

As for Jenny Arnold--the poor, innocent half-witted daughter and
sister of that evil family--Muriel or Agnes Medhurst had taken her
under her wing from the hour which witnessed the capture and ruin of
the stronghold on the lake, their joint home up to that hour. And
the two girls were not parted by Agnes’s marriage; Jenny went to
live with the married pair, and was as a sister to them both, under
their roof.

The End

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEA STORIES FOR BOYS

By JOHN GABRIEL ROWE

Large 12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Colored jacket

Price per volume, $1.00 Net

Every boy who knows the lure of exploring and who loves to rig up huts
and caves and tree-houses to fortify himself against imaginary enemies
will enjoy these books, for they give a vivid chronicle of the doings
and inventions of a group of boys who are shipwrecked and have to make
themselves snug and safe in tropical islands where the dangers are too
real for play.

1. CRUSOE ISLAND

Dick, Alf and Fred find themselves stranded on an unknown island with
the old seaman Josh, their ship destroyed by fire, their friends lost.

2. THE ISLAND TREASURE

With much ingenuity these boys fit themselves into the wild life of the
island they are cast upon in storm.

3. THE MYSTERY OF THE DERELICT

Their ship and companions perished in tempest at sea, the boys are
adrift in a small open boat when they spy a ship. Such a strange
vessel!--no hand guiding it, no soul on board,--a derelict.

4. THE LIGHTSHIP PIRATES

Modern Pirates, with the ferocity of beasts, attack a lightship
crew;--recounting the adventures that befall the survivors of that
crew,--and--“RETRIBUTION.”

5. THE SECRET OF THE GOLDEN IDOL

Telling of a mutiny, and how two youngsters were unwillingly involved in
one of the weirdest of treasure hunts,--and--“THE GOLDEN FETISH.”

Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE KING OF THE MOUNTAINS

(Le Roi des Montagnes)

By EDMOND ABOUT

Translated by Florence Crewe-Jones

Illustrated by George Avison

12mo. Illustrated. Beautiful cloth binding, stamped in gold. Jacket in
colors. Price $1.50 Net

Edmond About’s classic masterpiece of whimsical humor, romantic action
and wild surroundings, appeals to all classes and ages of readers. The
lawless, happy-go-lucky bands of the Grecian mountains, bargaining with
prisoners and government officials in a kind of uncivilized traffic,
affords the uncertainty in adventure which makes delightful reading for
boy or man.

Hadji Stavros is the never-to-be-forgotten representative of the right
to get without limits. To him the only injustice or error in life was in
being weak, in which any unselfishness was weakness. And yet, he allowed
his love for his daughter to overthrow his system of life. To be
entertained by “The King of the Mountains” as a dramatic story is not
enough, it is a profound study of character and life.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

TOM MARTIN

THE BREAKER BOY

By R. P. PHELPS

Illustrated by Howard L. Hastings.

Large 12mo.

Beautifully bound in cloth, stamped in gold, jacket in full colors.

Price $1.50 Net.

Tom Martin is the story of a boy’s struggle to make the best of life,
though in the worst of circumstances. His experience has the interest of
a boy who had been lost to his family from babyhood and was brought up
in the hardships and abuse of a shiftless miner’s household. But he
could overcome difficulties and endure the hardships because of his will
to become an honorable and successful man.

Tom Martin’s adventures and exciting experience were real events in the
work of the mines and the mistreatments of his supposed parents. How he
turned failure into success, righted his wrongs, and at last found his
own real friends and relatives, makes a strong story that any courageous
boy will enjoy reading. As the descriptions of life in the mines of West
Virginia and Pennsylvania are genuine, it is of great educational value
as to the coal-mining industry. Many improvements have been made in the
various methods of mining since Tom Martin’s experience, but the life of
the miners remains much the same. For interest in the life of a
courageous boy and the educational value as to the miner’s living, it is
a book that every boy should have joy in reading.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Everybody will love the story of

NOBODY’S BOY

By HECTOR MALOT

The dearest character in all the literature of child life is little Remi
in Hector Malot’s famous masterpiece Sans Famille (“Nobody’s Boy”).

All love, pathos, loyalty, and noble boy character are exemplified in
this homeless little lad, who has made the world better for his being in
it. The boy or girl who knows Remi has an ideal never to be forgotten.
But it is a story for grownups, too.

“Nobody’s Boy” is one of the supreme heart-interest stories of all time,
which will make you happier and better.

4 Colored Illustrations. $1.50 net.

At All Booksellers

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE COLLEGE SPORTS SERIES

By LESTER CHADWICK

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in Colors.

Price 75 cents per volume. Postage 10 cents additional.

Mr. Chadwick has played on the diamond and on the gridiron himself.

1. THE RIVAL PITCHERS

A Story of College Baseball

Tom Parsons, a “hayseed,” makes good on the scrub team of Randall
College.

2. A QUARTERBACK’S PLUCK

A Story of College Football

A football story, told in Mr. Chadwick’s best style, that is bound to
grip the reader from the start.

3. BATTING TO WIN

A Story of College Baseball

Tom Parsons and his friends Phil and Sid are the leading players on
Randall College team. There is a great game.

4. THE WINNING TOUCHDOWN

A Story of College Football

After having to reorganize their team at the last moment, Randall makes
a touchdown that won a big game.

5. FOR THE HONOR OF RANDALL

A Story of College Athletics

The winning of the hurdle race and long-distance run is extremely
exciting.

6. THE EIGHT-OARED VICTORS

A Story of College Water Sports

Tom, Phil and Sid prove as good at aquatic sports as they are on track,
gridiron and diamond.

Send for Our Free Illustrated Catalogue.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE GREAT MARVEL SERIES

By ROY ROCKWOOD

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in Colors

Price per volume, $1.00, postpaid

Stories of adventures in strange places, with peculiar people and queer
animals.

1. THROUGH THE AIR TO THE NORTH POLE or The Wonderful Cruise of the
Electric Monarch

The tale of a trip to the frozen North with a degree of reality that is
most convincing.

2. UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE or The Strange Cruise of the
Submarine Wonder

A marvelous trip from Maine to the South Pole, telling of adventures
with the sea-monsters and savages.

3. FIVE THOUSAND MILES UNDERGROUND or The Mystery of the Center of the
Earth

A cruise to the center of the earth through an immense hole found at an
island in the ocean.

4. THROUGH SPACE TO MARS or The Most Wonderful Trip on Record

This book tells how the journey was made in a strange craft and what
happened on Mars.

5. LOST ON THE MOON or In Quest of the Field of Diamonds

Strange adventures on the planet which is found to be a land of
desolation and silence.

6. ON A TORN-AWAY WORLD or Captives of the Great Earthquake

After a tremendous convulsion of nature the adventurers find themselves
captives on a vast “island in the air.”

7. THE CITY BEYOND THE CLOUDS or Captured by the Red Dwarfs

The City Beyond the Clouds is a weird place, full of surprises, and the
impish Red Dwarfs caused no end of trouble. There is a fierce battle in
the woods and in the midst of this a volcanic eruption sends the
Americans sailing away in a feverish endeavor to save their lives.

Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE JACK RANGER SERIES

By CLARENCE YOUNG

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in Colors

Price 75 cents per volume. Postage 10 cents additional

Lively stories of outdoor sports and adventure every boy will want to
read.

1. JACK RANGER’S SCHOOL DAYS or The Rivals of Washington Hall

You will love Jack Ranger--you simply can’t help it. He is bright and
cheery, and earnest in all he does.

2. JACK RANGER’S WESTERN TRIP or From Boarding School to Ranch and Range

This volume takes the hero to the great West. Jack is anxious to clear
up the mystery surrounding his father’s disappearance.

3. JACK RANGER’S SCHOOL VICTORIES or Track, Gridiron and Diamond

Jack gets back to Washington Hall and goes in for all sorts of school
games. There are numerous contests on the athletic field.

4. JACK RANGER’S OCEAN CRUISE or The Wreck of the Polly Ann

How Jack was carried off to sea against his will makes a “yarn” no boy
will want to miss.

5. JACK RANGER’S GUN CLUB or From Schoolroom to Camp and Trail

Jack organizes a gun club and with his chums goes in quest of big game.
They have many adventures in the mountains.

6. JACK RANGER’S TREASURE BOX or The Outing of the Schoolboy Yachtsmen

Jack receives a box from his father and it is stolen. How he regains it
makes an absorbing tale.

Send for Our Free Illustrated Catalogue.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Boy Hunters Series

By Captain Ralph Bonehill

12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, $1.00, postpaid

FOUR BOY HUNTERS Or, The Outing of the Gun Club

A fine, breezy story of the woods and waters, of adventures in search of
game, and of great times around the campfire, told in Captain Bonehill’s
best style. In the book are given full directions for camping out.

GUNS AND SNOWSHOES Or, The Winter Outing of the Young Hunters

In this volume the young hunters leave home for a winter outing on the
shores of a small lake. They hunt and trap to their heart’s content, and
have adventures in plenty, all calculated to make boys “sit up and take
notice.” A good healthy book; one with the odor of the pine forests and
the glare of the welcome campfire in every chapter.

YOUNG HUNTERS OF THE LAKE Or, Out with Rod and Gun

Another tale of woods and waters, with some strong hunting scenes and a
good deal of mystery. The three volumes make a splendid outdoor series.

OUT WITH GUN AND CAMERA Or, The Boy Hunters in the Mountains

Takes up the new fad of photographing wild animals as well as shooting
them. An escaped circus chimpanzee and an escaped lion add to the
interest of the narrative.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BASEBALL JOE SERIES

By LESTER CHADWICK

12mo. Illustrated. Price 50 cents per volume.

Postage 10 cents additional.

1. BASEBALL JOE OF THE SILVER STARS or The Rivals of Riverside

2. BASEBALL JOE ON THE SCHOOL NINE or Pitching for the Blue Banner

3. BASEBALL JOE AT YALE or Pitching for the College Championship

4. BASEBALL JOE IN THE CENTRAL LEAGUE or Making Good as a Professional
Pitcher

5. BASEBALL JOE IN THE BIG LEAGUE or A Young Pitcher’s Hardest Struggles

6. BASEBALL JOE ON THE GIANTS or Making Good as a Twirler in the
Metropolis

7. BASEBALL JOE IN THE WORLD SERIES or Pitching for the Championship

8. BASEBALL JOE AROUND THE WORLD or Pitching on a Grand Tour

9. BASEBALL JOE: HOME RUN KING or The Greatest Pitcher and Batter on
Record

10. BASEBALL JOE SAVING THE LEAGUE or Breaking Up a Great Conspiracy

11. BASEBALL JOE CAPTAIN OF THE TEAM or Bitter Struggles on the Diamond

12. BASEBALL JOE CHAMPION OF THE LEAGUE or The Record that was Worth
While

13. BASEBALL JOE CLUB OWNER or Putting the Home Town on the Map

14. BASEBALL JOE PITCHING WIZARD or Triumphs Off and On the Diamond

Send for Our Free Illustrated Catalogue.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE JEWEL SERIES

By AMES THOMPSON

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in colors

Price per volume, 65 cents

A series of stories brimming with hardy adventure, vivid and accurate in
detail, and with a good foundation of probability. They take the reader
realistically to the scene of action. Besides being lively and full of
real situations, they are written in a straightforward way very
attractive to boy readers.

1. THE ADVENTURE BOYS AND THE VALLEY OF DIAMONDS

Malcolm Edwards and his son Ralph are adventurers with ample means for
following up their interest in jewel clues. In this book they form a
party of five, including Jimmy Stone and Bret Hartson, boys of Ralph’s
age, and a shrewd level-headed sailor named Stanley Greene. They find a
valley of diamonds in the heart of Africa.

2. THE ADVENTURE BOYS AND THE RIVER OF EMERALDS

The five adventurers, staying at a hotel in San Francisco, find that
Pedro the elevator man has an interesting story of a hidden “river of
emeralds” in Peru, to tell. With him as guide, they set out to find it,
escape various traps set for them by jealous Peruvians, and are much
amused by Pedro all through the experience.

3. THE ADVENTURE BOYS AND THE LAGOON OF PEARLS

This time the group starts out on a cruise simply for pleasure, but
their adventuresome spirits lead them into the thick of things on a
South Sea cannibal island. Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue

Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BOMBA BOOKS

By ROY ROCKWOOD

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. With colored jacket.

Price 50 cents per volume.

Postage 10 cents additional.

Bomba lived far back in the jungles of the Amazon with a half-demented
naturalist who told the lad nothing of his past. The jungle boy was a
lover of birds, and hunted animals with a bow and arrow and his trusty
machete. He had a primitive education in some things, and his daring
adventures will be followed with breathless interest by thousands.

1. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY or The Old Naturalist’s Secret

2. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AT THE MOVING MOUNTAIN or The Mystery of the
Caves of Fire

3. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AT THE GIANT CATARACT or Chief Nasconora and His
Captives

4. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY ON JAGUAR ISLAND or Adrift on the River of
Mystery

5. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY IN THE ABANDONED CITY or A Treasure Ten Thousand
Years Old

6. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY ON TERROR TRAIL or The Mysterious Men from the
Sky

7. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY IN THE SWAMP OF DEATH or The Sacred Alligators
of Abarago

8. BOMBA THE JUNGLE BOY AMONG THE SLAVES or Daring Adventures in the
Valley of Skulls

Send for Our Free Illustrated Catalogue.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE WEBSTER SERIES

By FRANK V. WEBSTER

Mr. WEBSTER’S style is very much like that of the boys’ favorite author,
the late lamented Horatio Alger, Jr., but his tales are thoroughly
up-to-date.

Cloth. 12mo. Over 200 pages each. Illustrated. Stamped in various
colors.

Price per volume, 50 cents.

Postage 10 cents additional.

    Only a Farm Boy or Dan Hardy’s Rise in Life
    The Boy from the Ranch or Roy Bradner’s City Experiences
    The Young Treasure Hunter or Fred Stanley’s Trip to Alaska
    The Boy Pilot of the Lakes or Nat Morton’s Perils
    Tom the Telephone Boy or The Mystery of a Message
    Bob the Castaway or The Wreck of the Eagle
    The Newsboy Partners or Who Was Dick Box?
    Two Boy Gold Miners or Lost in the Mountains
    The Young Firemen of Lakeville or Herbert Dare’s Pluck
    The Boys of Bellwood School or Frank Jordan’s Triumph
    Jack the Runaway or On the Road with a Circus
    Bob Chester’s Grit or From Ranch to Riches
    Airship Andy or The Luck of a Brave Boy
    High School Rivals or Fred Markham’s Struggles
    Darry the Life Saver or The Heroes of the Coast
    Dick the Bank Boy or A Missing Fortune
    Ben Hardy’s Flying Machine or Making a Record for Himself
    Harry Watson’s High School Days or The Rivals of Rivertown
    Comrades of the Saddle or The Young Rough Riders of the Plains
    Tom Taylor at West Point or The Old Army Officer’s Secret
    The Boy Scouts of Lennox or Hiking Over Big Bear Mountain
    The Boys of the Wireless or a Stirring Rescue from the Deep
    Cowboy Dave or the Round-up at Rolling River
    Jack of the Pony Express or The Young Rider of the Mountain Trail
    The Boys of the Battleship or For the Honor of Uncle Sam

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BOB DEXTER SERIES

By WILLARD F. BAKER

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in Colors

Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid

This is a new line of stories for boys, by the author of the Boy
Ranchers series. The Bob Dexter books are of the character that may be
called detective stories, yet they are without the objectionable
features of the impossible characters and absurd situations that mark so
many of the books in that class. These stories deal with the up-to-date
adventures of a normal, healthy lad who has a great desire to solve
mysteries.

1. BOB DEXTER AND THE CLUB-HOUSE MYSTERY or The Missing Golden Eagle

This story tells how the Boys’ Athletic Club was despoiled of its
trophies in a strange manner, and how, among other things stolen, was
the Golden Eagle mascot. How Bob Dexter turned himself into an amateur
detective and found not only the mascot, but who had taken it, makes
interesting and exciting reading.

2. BOB DEXTER AND THE BEACON BEACH MYSTERY or The Wreck of the Sea Hawk

When Bob and his chum went to Beacon Beach for their summer vacation,
they were plunged, almost at once, into a strange series of events, not
the least of which was the sinking of the Sea Hawk. How some men tried
to get the treasure off the sunken vessel, and how Bob and his chum
foiled them, and learned the secret of the lighthouse, form a great
story.

3. BOB DEXTER AND THE STORM MOUNTAIN MYSTERY or The Secret of the Log
Cabin

Bob Dexter came upon a man mysteriously injured and befriended him. This
led the young detective into the swirling midst of a series of strange
events and into the companionship of strange persons, not the least of
whom was the man with the wooden leg. But Bob got the best of this
vindictive individual, and solved the mystery of the log cabin, showing
his friends how the secret entrance to the house was accomplished.

Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BOY RANCHERS SERIES

By WILLARD F. BAKER

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors

Price 50 cents per volume.

Postage 10 cents additional.

Stories of the great west, with cattle ranches as a setting, related in
such a style as to captivate the hearts of all boys.

1. THE BOY RANCHERS or Solving the Mystery at Diamond X

Two eastern boys visit their cousin. They become involved in an exciting
mystery.

2. THE BOY RANCHERS IN CAMP or the Water Fight at Diamond X

Returning for a visit, the two eastern lads learn, with delight, that
they are to become boy ranchers.

3. THE BOY RANCHERS ON THE TRAIL or The Diamond X After Cattle Rustlers

Our boy heroes take the trail after Del Pinzo and his outlaws.

4. THE BOY RANCHERS AMONG THE INDIANS or Trailing the Yaquis

Rosemary and Floyd are captured by the Yaqui Indians but the boy
ranchers trailed them into the mountains and effected the rescue.

5. THE BOY RANCHERS AT SPUR CREEK or Fighting the Sheep Herders

Dangerous struggle against desperadoes for land rights brings out heroic
adventures.

6. THE BOY RANCHERS IN THE DESERT or Diamond X and the Lost Mine

One night a strange old miner almost dead from hunger and hardship
arrived at the bunk house. The boys cared for him and he told them of
the lost desert mine.

7. THE BOY RANCHERS ON ROARING RIVER or Diamond X and the Chinese
Smugglers

The boy ranchers help capture Delton’s gang who were engaged in
smuggling Chinese across the border.

8. THE BOY RANCHERS IN DEATH VALLEY or Diamond X and the Poison Mystery

The Boy Ranchers track Mysterious Death into his cave.

Send for Our Free Illustrated Catalogue.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Speedwell Boys Series

By ROY ROCKWOOD

Author of “The Dave Dashaway Series,” “Great Marvel Series,” etc.

12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid

All boys who love to be on the go will welcome the Speedwell boys. They
are clean cut and loyal lads.

The Speedwell Boys on Motor Cycles or The Mystery of a Great
Conflagration

The lads were poor, but they did a rich man a great service and he
presented them with their motor cycles. What a great fire led to is
exceedingly well told.

The Speedwell Boys and Their Racing Auto or A Run for the Golden Cup

A tale of automobiling and of intense rivalry on the road. There was an
endurance run and the boys entered the contest. On the run they rounded
up some men who were wanted by the law.

The Speedwell Boys and Their Power Launch or To the Rescue of the
Castaways

Here is an unusual story. There was a wreck, and the lads, in their
power launch, set out to the rescue. A vivid picture of a great storm
adds to the interest of the tale.

The Speedwell Boys in a Submarine or The Lost Treasure of Rocky Cove

An old sailor knows of a treasure lost under water because of a cliff
falling into the sea. The boys get a chance to go out in a submarine and
they make a hunt for the treasure.

The Speedwell Boys and Their Ice Racer or The Perils of a Great Blizzard

The boys had an idea for a new sort of iceboat, to be run by combined
wind and motor power. How they built the craft, and what fine times they
had on board of it, is well related.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Saddle Boys Series

By CAPTAIN JAMES CARSON

12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid.

All lads who love life in the open air and a good steed, will want to
peruse these books. Captain Carson knows his subject thoroughly, and his
stories are as pleasing as they are healthful and instructive.

The Saddle Boys of the Rockies or Lost on Thunder Mountain

Telling how the lads started out to solve the mystery of a great noise
in the mountains--how they got lost--and of the things they discovered.

The Saddle Boys in the Grand Canyon or The Hermit of the Cove

A weird and wonderful story of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado, told in
a most absorbing manner. The Saddle Boys are to the front in manner to
please all young readers.

The Saddle Boys on the Plains or After a Treasure of Gold

In this story the scene is shifted to the great plains of the southwest
and then to the Mexican border. There is a stirring struggle for gold,
told as only Captain Carson can tell it.

The Saddle Boys at Circle Ranch or In at the Grand Round-up

Here we have lively times at the ranch, and likewise the particulars of
a grand round-up of cattle and encounters with wild animals and also
cattle thieves. A story that breathes the very air of the plains.

The Saddle Boys on Mexican Trails or In the Hands of the Enemy

The scene is shifted in this volume to Mexico. The boys go on an
important errand, and are caught between the lines of the Mexican
soldiers. They are captured and for a while things look black for them;
but all ends happily.

CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers--New York





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SERGEANT DICK OF THE ROYAL MOUNTED POLICE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The story hunter
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The story hunter
        or, Tales of the weird and wild

Author: Ernest R. Suffling

Illustrator: Paul Hardy

Release date: August 3, 2025 [eBook #76622]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Jarrold & Sons, 1896

Credits: Susan E., David E. Brown, Andrew Butchers, Sue Clark, Mary Fahnestock-Thomas, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY HUNTER ***





THE STORY HUNTER




[Illustration: “Into the mouthpiece of the machine I spoke, asking, ‘Do
you hear me?’”--_p. 21._]




  THE STORY HUNTER
  OR
  TALES OF THE WEIRD AND WILD

  BY
  ERNEST R. SUFFLING

  _Author of “Afloat in a Gipsy Van,” “Jethou, or Crusoe Life in the
  Channel Islands,” “Life on the Broads,” etc._

  _ILLUSTRATED BY PAUL HARDY_

  [Illustration]

  LONDON
  JARROLD & SONS, 10 AND 11, WARWICK LANE, E.C.
  [_All Rights Reserved_]
  1896




PREFACE.


A year or two since, when I wrote _Jethou; or Crusoe Life in the
Channel Isles_, I received a large number of press reviews and
criticisms, all but two of which were of a very satisfactory and
encouraging tone, and spoke so flatteringly of my future career as a
writer of fiction, as to cause a blush--perhaps of modesty--perhaps
of hope--to suffuse my lily cheek. One of the adverse critics, who
must have been troubled with liver complaint in some form, took a
pessimistic view of my work, doubting the facts contained in the book,
and--in a literary sense--running amuck with the fictional portions.
But, as he unwittingly helped the sale of the first edition of
_Jethou_, I thank the wielder of this biting pen.

The other detractor found no particular fault with the book, but
thought the writer somewhat _lacking in high invention_, _i.e._, in
imaginative power.

Of course few persons see their own faults, and I had never even
dreamed that I had any lack of inventive power. But now that my
deficiency has been suggested to me by the critic of London’s
leading daily newspaper, I venture to place the present volume before
the public as an effort towards the vindication of my imaginative
power, and with the earnest hope that something may be found in it
of sufficient interest to repay the reader for the time spent in its
perusal.

                                                          E. R. SUFFLING.

  _Blomfield Lodge,
      Portsdown Road,
          London, W._




CONTENTS.


                                                   PAGE

         INTRODUCTION--A HYPNOTIST ON WHEELS          9

     I.  THE STRANGE DISCOVERY OF DOCTOR NOSIDY      15

    II.  TWO RUINED TOWERS                           36

   III.  A STRANGE RESURRECTION                      64

    IV.  A VISITOR FROM MARS                         87

     V.  BARBE ROUGE                                105

    VI.  ROBIN HOOD IN WINTER                       124

   VII.  ECCLES OLD TOWER                           144

  VIII.  THE MONK’S PENANCE                         161

    IX.  DOCTOR ANGUS SINCLAIR                      184

     X.  THE PHANTOM RIDERS                         211




THE STORY HUNTER.




INTRODUCTION.

A HYPNOTIST ON WHEELS.


Most men have a hobby of some kind, and I am certainly no exception to
the general rule. Some love boating; some painting; others carving,
angling, walking, shooting, or one of a hundred other diversions. The
hobbies of noted men would fill a goodly volume--thus Tosti is fond of
upholstering; Gladstone of tree-felling; the Sultan of Turkey is an
amateur carpenter; the Shah of Persia photographs everything he can
aim his lens at; the late Lord R. Churchill collected the teeth of
criminals; H.R.H. the Princess of Wales has a passion for specimens of
lace; and so on.

Now I love none of these pursuits, but will confess at once that my
delight is _a good story_; something out of the usual rut of everyday
fiction; something fresh, stimulating, racy; and to gratify my hobby I
have been for many years a most voluminous reader.

No scientific works for me, thank you; no dreary, three-volume, society
novels; give me good, sterling works of _fiction_--neither namby-pamby
on the one hand, nor revoltingly realistic on the other--but sound,
entertaining, well-worked-out fiction.

Generally speaking, my experience of writers is disappointing. One soon
finds out their style of working, and after reading a short way into
a story, the _dénouement_ can frequently be correctly conjectured.
Some authors are aware of this, and purposely lead their readers upon
a wrong scent quite up to the penultimate chapter, and then suddenly
surprise them by reversing their preconceived idea of the final
disposition of the characters represented. This is extremely puzzling
to that section of lady readers who “just glance at the last chapter”
before wading through the volume, and must be extremely tantalizing to
them as well.

Now it so happens that I have little else to do in life but to obey my
own sweet will; no wife have I, and but few relations, and as to them,
I steadfastly believe there is a great deal of truth in the aphorism,
“relatives are best apart.” So strongly am I convinced of this, that I
foster a fondness for peregrinating, solitarily, over the length and
breadth of England, and even for making occasional incursions into
Scotland or Wales.

My income is small but ample--a cosy £500 a year--upon which I can
manage in comfort, especially as I have adopted a novel system of
living; novel, not because it has not been carried out to a certain
extent before, but because I have made a permanent institution of it;
I am a dweller in a caravan, not merely during the pleasant summer
months, but _à la_ gipsy, all the year round; and, what is more, I
thoroughly enjoy my solitary life on wheels. I have no rates or taxes
to pay, and if I have troublesome neighbours I move; in fact I am a
progressive man, I am _always_ on the move.

My horse and I get on admirably together: in the summer he sleeps in
meadow or lane, on heath or common, while I sling my hammock in my
roomy van; but in the winter I stable my steed at an inn, and, as for
myself, laugh as I hear the snow-laden wind rasping vainly at the
woodwork and windows of my domicile. I am snug and secure from any
weather that may assail me; and with my pipe, my dog, and my books, am
as comfortable and free as the Queen in her Castle at Windsor.

But all this is not my very particular _hobby_; it is simply my mode of
living, and a free, healthy, Bohemian life it is.

As I have before remarked, I have a fondness for a good story; and
I have a peculiar way of securing that article. I do not go to a
book-shelf, get down a volume, and read a cut-and-dried version of
some adventure or incident--frequently spoiled by the opinions of
the writer, thrust willy-nilly upon the unfortunate reader--but I go
straight to the fountain-head--to the hero or chief participator in the
scenes and adventures described--and so get my story first-hand, _vivâ
voce_, from the lips of the living narrator.

In disclosing how I succeed in this I must first make a confession;
then my _modus operandi_ will be at once plain.

I am a hypnotist.

Not a professional, séance-giving operator. I simply took the subject
up as one would any other scientific pursuit, such as geology, botany,
or electricity, and in a couple of years became remarkably expert in
the fascinating diversion. I say _diversion_ purposely, as it _is_ my
diversion, wherever I wander during my nomadic life.

When a lad I read, and was enchanted with the wonderful stories of _The
Thousand and One Tales, or Arabian Nights’ Entertainments_, and now
that I have arrived at years of sober discretion, I look upon it as my
undoubted right to have a story told to me by every person I may induce
to share the hospitality of my caravan.

The Sultan Schahriyar was told a thousand and one tales by his
beautiful young bride Shahrazad, but as I have no beautiful young
consort to spin me nightly yarns--which, coming from one brain, must
necessarily have had a sameness--I have recourse to persons I meet in
my peregrinations, who, after an enjoyable meal and a pipe, allow me,
as a favour, to hypnotize them. The trance state having been induced
in a very brief time, I then exert my will-force, and request my
subject to tell me a story of anything remarkable that has happened in
his experience, or with which he was connected. By this means I have
listened to nearly as many recitals as Schahriyar himself; some good,
some commonplace, some not worth listening to; while a few of them
struck me as being very remarkable and quite out of the ordinary run of
book stories. It is a selection from these which I have collected in
this volume.

I must point out that in giving publicity to these stories I do not
betray any trust; as, apart from having the sanction of my guests, or,
as some would term them, victims--I have so altered names, places, and
dates as to make the individuality of the narrators quite secure from
discovery and consequent annoyance.

It may be asked, “Why do you go to the trouble of hypnotizing your
guests, when they would probably tell you a story without being placed
under mesmeric control?”

Now I am quite aware that “The Ancient Mariner” “stopped one of
three,” because the said one was _unwilling_, and therefore had to be
fixed with his “glittering eye,” but _my_ guests are _willing_ ones.
They would probably, out of courtesy to me, as host, tell me a story
in a sociable manner enough, but then, would they tell me the whole
truth? Would they not be liable to gloss over certain incidents, to
suppress others, and to add (for the sake of embellishment) many little
touches, which, however interesting and probable, might not be strictly
veracious?

Probably they would; and loving as I do to hear a _true_ story, I
always prefer to hypnotize my guest, who then gives me the facts just
as they come uppermost in his mind, and his narration is free from
flourishes or any great amount of extraneous or interpolated matter.

I do not know that I have anything else of a personal nature to place
before the reader, but will commence the first story after I have
premised it by a few words upon the narrator.

Dr. Nosidy is what many persons would term “a genius deranged.”
It must, however, be remembered, that frequently only a very thin
partition divides the genius from the madman, and one can recall the
names of many great geniuses, who in their day were looked upon rather
as lunatics than as shining lights of the world. The Doctor, by his
personal appearance and conversation, did not in the least impress me
with the idea that he was suffering from any mental aberration, but I
must admit his remarkable story gave me grounds for surmising, that he
was either a man far in advance of the times, or else one who would,
at no distant period, be likely to end his career under lock and key.

He was a small man with a bald head, round the circumference of which
grew a fringe of curly grey hair. His eyes were dark and sparkling, his
nose large and aquiline, and his mouth broad and thin, indicative of
volubility and power, with perhaps some acerbity of temper.

When I explained to him my hypnotic powers he fell in with my humour at
once, and in a few minutes, being placed in the trance state, commenced
the following curious recital, which I will call “The Strange Discovery
of Doctor Nosidy.”




I.

THE STRANGE DISCOVERY OF DOCTOR NOSIDY.


It is said proverbially, and I am quite aware of the fact, that a
little knowledge is a dangerous thing, and that sharp tools should not
be entrusted to the hands of unskilled persons; and it is because some
may depreciate my knowledge, and class me among those to whom sharp
tools are a danger, both to themselves and the community at large, that
I have not placed my discovery before the scientific world.

I have no particular ambition to pose as a great genius or inventor;
the things which I have discovered are so simple, that anybody else,
following the same line of thought, would probably have stumbled upon
the same truths. That my discoveries, placed in the hands of profane or
frivolous persons, would be fraught with many and great evils I do not
deny, and it is for this consideration that I refrain from giving my
_exact_ modus operandi in this narrative.

As will be seen from a perusal of this short recital, but little
further thought and elaboration are required to place my experiments
among the most astounding of this most marvellous age of discovery and
invention.

It is a trite expression we make use of when we say that “Electricity
is in its infancy.” Of course it is; it is but in its swaddling
clothes: but, by and by, it will grow such a powerful fellow as to
claim by right the kingship of the whole mechanical and motive world.

Now to my mind the two greatest forces in the universe are brain power
(or intellect) and electricity; and the time is rapidly approaching
when these two subtle energies shall govern or control nearly
everything under the sun. My friends infer that if I had a little
more brain force I should not take such absurd views of these two
great _Souls of Man and Motion_, as I am pleased to term intellect and
electricity. That I am not so distraught as my friends are pleased to
suppose, may be gathered from the outcome of those experiments which I
am now about to explain, so far at least as that can be done without
actually divulging the particular secrets which, for the present, I
wish to withhold, even from the great _savants_ of this scientific
epoch. I am afraid, however, that some reader of these lines will, if
he be of a keen, searching, inventive temperament, come in a short time
very near the borders of that discovery which it has taken me a dozen
years to experiment upon, and place in its present unfinished form.

Even when I was a lad I was a great reader and literary delver after
things which were in any way obscure, unfinished, or apparently
unfathomable; and among the many theories I formed upon subjects of
which the world had written much, and talked more, without advancing
any nearer to their solution, was an idea regarding the soul of man!

I may say in a few words, without giving the precise chain of thought
I employed, that my idea of man’s soul was--that it was nothing more
nor less than his _brain_; for is not that the very spirit, essence,
conscience, reason, and vital principle of man?

Certainly: for in what degree can even a man’s heart compare with
his brain in the supremacy it asserts over his corporeal body? It
is true that the heart is essential to him, and has a great work to
perform, and can do it without help from his brain, even while the body
and brain sleep; but, after all, it is a mere beautiful machine--a
mechanical, monotonous slave, with nothing more to recommend it to
notice than its faithfulness to its hidden duty.

Now let me affirm at once that the brain _is_ the soul, and when you
acquiesce in this, you will see more clearly how it is worked out
as a substantial truth in my wonderful experiments, or rather, as
their wonderful _result_; experiments, which after all were but my
intellectual knowledge reduced to a reasonable system.

Very well. I commenced my experiments with this theory properly worked
out in my own mind, but not substantiated with positive proof, _that
the soul and the brain were synonymous_.

Now the soul never dies--consequently the brain never dies! It decays,
and resolves itself into its constituent atoms, but it leaves behind it
what I will term _brain-ether_, which is absolutely indestructible and
immortal, and consequently lasts through all time.

Then came the thought--“If the brain-ether exists, where shall I find
it?” I wanted to know this one thing; then I could work out the ideas
I had in my mind, following them up with experiments to prove the
correctness of my premises.

Just think for a few moments of the vast encyclopædia of knowledge
stored in a human brain of ordinary calibre; think of the scenes, the
faces, the technical knowledge, the music, the skill, and the secrets
that human brain contains, and which, when the body decays, are turned
into ethereal memories--memories _not lost_, but stored up in the
brain-ether for ever.

Now it occurred to me, that if I could only ascertain what became of
this brain-ether as the body decayed, that I might secure some of it,
and with the help of modern scientific apparatus, so far capture its
treasury of knowledge as to make that latent knowledge of incalculable
service to mankind.

For many weeks I thought of places likely to be the earthly
resting-place of what I considered to be the fugitive brain-ether, and,
like every other mortal who has essayed the same intellectual feat, I
failed because I had the words, “The soul has fled,” ever present in my
mind.

Naturally, when a human being dies, if one says, “His soul has fled,”
the person spoken to directly assumes that the soul has left the body,
and gone no one knows whither. But, being scientifically artful, I took
an opposite and antagonistic view of the usually accepted answer, and
said to myself:

“Now suppose the soul has not fled, but is still present in the cranium
in the form of brain-ether.”

This startling hypothesis I took and worked upon. Forsaking the common
theory, I resolved to see if I could not by some means discover the
brain-ether, which I was morally certain existed _somewhere_, and which
I quite believed was as likely, or more likely, to be found in its
ordinary resting-place--the cranium--as elsewhere.

A recently deceased body or head was of no service to me to
experimentalize upon, as the spirit or essential ether would not have
become free till the disintegration of the pulpy matter of the brain
was complete. What I wanted was a skeleton, or even a skull, which had
neither been opened nor tampered with; and having no medical friends I
was at a loss to know how I could supply my want, when a lucky accident
gave me just what I required.

One day I was walking through Gower Street, London, when whom should I
run against but my old friend Stairs. Stairs is an Egyptologist, great
at reading hieroglyphics and cuneiform writing. Not having seen each
other for two years, we naturally strolled into the Horseshoe Hotel to
finish our chat in comfort, and to lubricate our throats, which have a
wonderful knack of becoming dry when their owners meet old friends.

Stairs had been away for fifteen months in Egypt searching for any
curious things having a commercial value in England. During his
wanderings in the country of the Pharaohs, he had purchased a large
number of curios, stones, amulets, rings, sarcophagi, and mummies,
which he was now endeavouring to dispose of to the trustees of the
British Museum.

After I had heard many of his adventures, it became his turn to inquire
how I was employing myself, and this finally led to my explaining to
Stairs all about my theory of the soul. Of course, being ignorant of
the matter, he simply laughed, and suggested that I had better have one
of his mummies to experiment upon!

Why not?

Just the very thing; what could be better than an ancient, unrolled
mummy, some three thousand years old?

I was positively delighted; and in furtherance of my fancy he handed
me his card, on the understanding that I was to proceed to his house,
and make a selection of any mummy I thought would suit my purpose, take
it home with me for a month to experiment upon, and at the end of that
time return it to him.

That very evening I went to my friend’s house in Gordon Square with a
small covered van, and brought my precious Egyptian away, thankful to
old Stairs for his kindly consideration. Stairs was off to Italy for a
month, and I had his permission to do what I liked with the mummy, so
long as I did not spoil its commercial value.

When the defunct Egyptian was safely deposited in my study I could have
hugged him for very joy, but refrained from the embrace as he smelt a
trifle musty.

I, Doctor Nosidy, scientist, mesmerist, thought-reader, and
electrician, felt that evening that I stood upon the threshold of
some grand discovery. The thought thrilled me as it did Columbus when
he came in sight of the long-sought land, or Bernard Palissy when
he discovered the true mode of firing his beautiful pottery-ware,
or Galileo when he discovered the movement of the earth. I felt the
sensations of these and other discoverers rolled into one; moreover,
it was my conviction that I was about to find something by the side of
which their discoveries would appear insignificant indeed.

Setting my apparatus in order, I commenced work by unrolling the head
of the mummy; carefully stripping off the multitudinous layers of
cerecloth, which were permeated quite through with a dark, brittle
gum or resin of some kind. By and by I came to the leathery and
gum-covered visage, wrinkled, emaciated, and black with the dry
atmosphere of thirty centuries.

Dark curly hair still adhered to the skull, and was not so brittle but
that, after bathing the compressed locks, I could lift them with the
blade of a spatula quite away from the cranium without damage. The
whole head was a very fine one--the nose prominent and hawk-like, the
eyes cavernous, and the mouth excessively broad and grinning; the lips
were so dried and compressed that they were flat with the face. The
teeth were still white and glossy, and the entire absence of any signs
of decay proclaimed the fact that the owner was young at his decease.

All these features I noticed as I worked away upon my subject, and
having at length uncovered the whole head, I made a small hole through
the apex of the cranium with a brad-awl. This done, I inserted, into
the space once occupied by the brain, the ends of the wires connected
with a certain electric instrument. Into the mouthpiece of the machine
I spoke, asking,

“Do you hear me?”

I listened, but of course no reply came.

How could it?

I had been much too eager to commence my work, and of a certainty, this
my first attempt could but end in one way--in absolute failure, and
that from three causes.

1st. The brain of a deceased Egyptian was removed through the nostrils
when the embalming took place.

2nd. Even if the brain-ether still tenanted the cranium the lips could
form no answer to my query, as they were so dry and parched as to have
no power of movement.

3rd. If the conditions of brain and lips were favourable, and I really
obtained a sound, it would certainly be in the dead Egyptian tongue,
which to me would be quite unintelligible. What should I do?

My defunct monarch, or whoever he might be, was suddenly transformed
into a useless incumbrance, instead of a scientific help.

Instead of hugging him for joy I could now have beaten him as a
scientific fraud.

There was nothing for it but to take a day or two and think the matter
out in an intelligent and calm manner.

I did think it out; and on the third day had so far perfected my
primal theory, that I resolved to give the mummy one more chance of
communicating with a nineteenth-century scientist.

Starting with the assumption that the subject would have been dead
from a few hours to a couple of days before the embalmers would
commence their process, and that the brain being lifeless and cold, the
spirit-ether might have escaped into its bony case and have remained in
the skull after the actual brain-matter was abstracted by the cunning
embalmer and his assistants,--I argued that it would be possible for
me to communicate with this spirit-ether, which would still retain in
an ethereal form the vast store of knowledge which the deceased had
accumulated when on earth. In that spirit-ether would be indelibly
written, as it were, a record of the whole life of the deceased, with
all his cares and pleasures, knowledge of contemporary events, and the
haunting memory of his sins.

Assuming, I say, that this record was present in an invisible, subtle
form, how, even if I could communicate with the brain-ether, would it
be possible to obtain a reply?

As I have said, I am a thought-reader, and my hope was that, if my
query were understood by the soul (or brain-ether) of the mummy, I
could, by the exercise of my peculiar function of reading thought,
obtain a reply.

All seemed correct in theory, and to put it to the test, I, that very
evening, opened communication with my ebony subject. One wire was
inserted through the cranium and the other, instead of being attached
to a sound receiver, I coiled several times around my own head!

Again I put the question “Do you hear me?”

Nothing at first transpired; but, on repeating the question several
times, my brain became aware of the power of thought working in the
dead skull, and this thought-voice gradually became coherent, until
I could actually detect the vibration of certain words being formed,
which were, however, not sufficiently distinct for me to understand.

My brain was quickly tired with the intense strain of sustained
thought, and, lying down on the couch, I fell fast asleep, to dream of
the land of the Pharaohs.

In my dream I seemed to hear people speaking to each other, and to see
them going about their usual avocations. I appeared in my dream to be
inside the shop of an Eastern hairdresser, where an Egyptian fop was
having his hair curled and dressed for some evening function, possibly
a ball or supper. The hairdresser and his young patron appeared to be
cracking jokes in their native tongue, of which I could not understand
a word, but still I laughed at their jokes as heartily as if I fathomed
every quip they uttered. At length I laughed so loudly in my sleep at
one of the barber’s witticisms, that I awoke to find tears of merriment
streaming from my eyes.

My dream had solved part of the problem!

Of course the thought-words I had read, by means of the wire round
my head, were in the _Egyptian_ tongue, hence the reason for my not
understanding them.

Here was a dilemma!

However, I did not give up my mummy; for, although I could neither ask
intelligible questions nor receive answers that I could understand, I
obtained Egyptian _thoughts_ whenever I had a mind.

I kept the royal corpse for the allotted month, and then returned it in
its deal case, with a letter of thanks to my friend in Gordon Square.

A dead subject was all very well, but a _dead language_ was beyond me.

So far my success was very encouraging. I had learnt, among other
things, that the soul, or brain-ether, still tenants the skull after
the substance of the brain is entirely dissipated--provided it has not
been removed from the cavity before decay set in.

With strong hopes of better success, I now resolved to obtain an
English skull and try my skill upon it.

During my peregrinations in the South of England the following week, I
found myself in the neighbourhood of X---- Cathedral, and strolling,
almost unthinkingly, into its grand interior, admired its decorations
and memorials. It was late in the day, and as in the gathering gloaming
I wandered round the solemn building, I found myself gazing upon some
curious painted coffins containing the remains of certain of our Saxon
kings. Gazing upon them I became fascinated, for they suggested
another step towards the realization of my grand scheme.

As I stood before these sepulchres of the long dead, I am sorry to
say the longing came into my mind to possess a skull from one of the
decorated coffins; and presently the longing became so intense, that,
like some villainous body-snatcher, I hid myself behind a stack of
chairs in the nave, remaining there seated comfortably on a hassock
till the great bell tolled forth the noon of night, when, coming forth
from my hiding-place, I effected my ghoulish purpose, and secreted
under my cape the cranium of a Saxon monarch.

The weary hours of the night lagged in their monotonous round, for I
dared not sleep, fearing I might not awaken before the opening of the
south door for the eight o’clock service; but my vigil was ended at
last by the arrival of a gaping old man, who came to ring the bell
calling early worshippers to the holy fane. The entry of several
persons to the building gave me an opportunity of walking quickly out
without attracting attention, but I can scarcely describe my feelings
of shame, nor is there perhaps any need of doing so. Necessity,
the noble mother of invention, had made a very criminal of me; but
whatever loathing I had for myself was condoned by the fact, that what
I was doing was for the sake of mankind at large; and although I had
purloined the principal part of a royal personage, I could not look
upon it as a theft, but merely as a loan from one who had no further
use for his ancient head.

A few hours brought me again to the mighty metropolis, and I quickly
set to work with my elaborate apparatus, but, alas! only to be the
victim of another disappointment.

Although I could obtain certain mental sounds (if I may so term them),
and could, by the aid of my thought-reading power, understand that
words were being thought by the brain-ether in the monarch’s cranium,
yet, unfortunately, to fathom their meaning was beyond me.

Pure Saxon was a language with which I was totally unacquainted!

Here was another stupid mistake of mine, of precisely the same nature
as the one I made in my first experiment.

What could I do?

Very little.

I copied down, phonetically, a number of the words which the monarch
was _thinking_, and showed them to a professor of Anglo-Saxon, but
all he could do was to translate some of them into modern English, so
giving a series of words without any sequence or connection whatever.

Angry with myself, and angry with the skull simply for being Saxon,
and therefore not understandable, I took it in my hand, and, in my
disappointment and rage, should doubtless have shattered it into
fragments against the wall, but for the sudden ringing of my door bell,
warning me of the arrival of a gentleman with whom I had an appointment.

When the interview was over my anger had ceased also, and that
afternoon, with the skull in a bag, I took train for X----, and
repaired to my stack of chairs in the cathedral. I hid myself again,
like a felon, till the doors were closed, then restoring the skull
uninjured to its resting-place, crept back to my hassock seat, and
awaited the dawning.

I fell asleep, and I suppose snored, for, to my astonishment, I
was awakened next morning by the verger, who, not believing my
cock-and-bull story of having been shut in the cathedral while absorbed
in the contemplation of the ancient structure and its interesting
relics, haled me before a magistrate.

It was with difficulty I proved my identity, and doing so cost me all
the loose cash I had about me in telegraphing to my friends, before the
worthy magistrate would release me, although I had been twice searched
to see if anything of value was secreted about my person.

Oh, science! what miseries thou hast for ages brought upon thy noblest
sons! What sorrows; what disappointments; what troubles and trials, and
alas, what terms of vile durance! I, being one of thy sons, have shared
all these evils, though perhaps in a minor degree!

My failures, however, were not unmitigated: I had established the
fact that brain-ether and brain-thought were present in skulls,
whatever their nationality, and to whatever period they might belong;
my failures were attributable principally to my lack of linguistic
knowledge, a lack that might easily be remedied.

My business now became to seek a skull of a more modern period. I
applied at a number of likely places, and at last was successful
in obtaining a fine, large specimen, which had a clean and refined
appearance. I paid but a small sum for it, and carried it home to my
study in triumph. Surely at last I was on the road to the development
of my pet project.

After dinner, all being quiet, I commenced experiments upon the skull,
and having placed my apparatus in order, I asked my usual question:

“Who are you?”

“Sidney Smith,” came the reply.

Good gracious, I thought, can this be the great wit?

“You do not mean to say,” I asked, “that you are the great Sidney
Smith?”

“I reckon you have just hit the right nail on the head,” was the
immediate thought-reply.

What a piece of luck.

“Well, Mr. Smith, such men as you the world sees but too rarely; your
name is still a household word among us, being constantly quoted as
that of the brightest star of wit of your day.”

“Whip you mean?” came from the skull.

“No; I said _wit_; a jocular person, you know.”

“I ain’t no wit nor jocular person,” was the response, “not as I knows
what ‘jocular’ is exactly, but if it is anything to do with a jockey
it’s nothing to do with me, for I stood six feet four, and weighed
seventeen stone. If you calls me a ‘whip’ instead of a ‘wit,’ there you
are right, for I drove the York and Manchester coach for over twenty
years.”

I found my subject very garrulous, very thick-headed, and very
quarrelsome--a man of high stature but low breeding; one who knew
nothing of any subjects but those of a horsey nature. One day our
conversation became so warm, and such a string of bad language flooded
the fellow’s brain-ether, that I had to disconnect my battery. I left
the cranium for some days, thinking that the man’s temper would have
cooled down, for I supposed that when I disconnected the electric
wires the current of thought ceased; but when I applied the wires to
my head, I found that the old store of abuse was still at work in the
brain-ether of my giant subject, and the end of the matter was, that I
smashed the beautiful skull into a thousand fragments against my study
wall, thus dissipating the soul or brain-ether into space.

I did not regret the occurrence, for the fellow was most vituperative
and impertinent whenever I wished to know anything of his family
secrets or earthly career.

Still, when I think of it, I have a deal for which to thank that
giant skull. It was during the fortnight that I possessed it that
I, to a great extent, perfected my apparatus for Soul-Reading,
Brain-Ether-Reviewing, Etherealized-Human-Record-Deciphering, or
whatever men may term my discovery, for I have not yet invented a title
for it myself.

I therefore thank that broken vase of humanity, though being broken, I
cannot convey my thanks as I would wish, for there is no brain-ether
left to convey it to.

Alas, poor giant!

Hundreds of skulls have come under my apparatus for examination during
the past decade, and I possess facts that would make many great English
families quake; facts asserted by ancestors’ souls--_and souls cannot
lie_--of how titles and estates have been wrongfully obtained, and
rightful heirs darkly put aside to favour other candidates.

I know of facts, suppressed in history, which, were I to reveal their
dark catalogue of murders, conspiracies and political intrigues, would
put a fresh interpretation upon the records of our country. But of what
avail would the disclosure be to our present generation? The heart
of man in the nineteenth century is, what it has been in all ages,
“desperately wicked.”

On the other hand, it has been my good fortune to converse with kings
and ambassadors, with men of learning, poets, statesmen, with artists
and men of science, even with the great Isaac Newton himself, and am
now in the position of being the best-informed man, upon past history
and events, of any person in the world. Men say there is but a thin
partition between a savant and a madman. I know better; I may be the
former, but between me and madness a vast gap yawns, although my
friends will have their little jibe at me. Great men ever had their
traducers, and I, naturally, am no exception.

Of all those with whom I have chatted--and by my experiments I can
converse with the spirit or soul of _any_ person, provided I have the
skull to which I can attach my apparatus--there has not been one equal
in intellectual capacity to Sir Isaac Newton, a most steady, solid man
of scientific sense.

Now Newton’s idea of the brain and my own precisely coincide, and if I
give _my_ notion upon the subject I give his also. Here it is.

The brain is an elaborate storehouse of knowledge of every kind. It
contains a record of _all_ one has learned during one’s lifetime; I say
_all_, because if a person has learned a thing and forgotten it, it
must not be supposed that that thing has vanished from the brain; not
so; it is faithfully recorded in the brain substance, though the mental
faculties may not be strong enough to _reproduce_ the particular thing
or theme when wanted.

Not only is everything once learnt retained by the brain, but it also
contains a record of every _action_ of one’s life. All these actions
and events are stored away in minute cells to the number of hundreds of
thousands, and yet to the human eye they are not as visible as a pin’s
point; in fact, they have no dimensions whatever.

Now, supposing this theory to be correct, can we not see (and I say it
with great reverence) how easy the task of the Recording Angel must
be; can we not imagine the celestial one reading the record of a man’s
brain as easily as we poor mundane mortals can scan a book?

Are not many biblical texts elucidated by this theory; for instance,
Ecclesiastes xii. 14; Matthew xii. 37; and Hebrews iv. 13?

But then the theory of the brain-ether, or the soul as some call
it, goes further. I am of opinion that the soul is not _spirit_ but
_matter_; matter of such infinitely minute particles as to be perfectly
invisible to even the most powerful microscope yet made.

Let me explain my meaning more fully.

Just as there are differences in the bulk and solidity of various
materials, so is there a vast difference in the tangibility, if I may
so term it, of various bodies and substances.

Take a cubic foot of steel--matter beyond all doubt--and of what
closely-compacted solidity and enormous density! Then take a cubic
foot of smoke, that again is matter, but what immeasurable difference
in density, tangibility, and even visibility there is in the two
substances!

Then go a step further, and imagine a cubic foot of gas: it is
invisible, intangible, and possesses but little density, yet it is
_matter_, it is not spirit.

Now, seeing the vast difference between various matters, can we not
believe that the brain, instead of being soul or spirit, may still
be matter of such a rare and subtle quality that there is even more
difference between it and gas, than between gas and a solid lump of
steel or granite?

If you can follow that suggestion you have my theory; but having spoken
of my theory I go no farther. Of what my apparatus consists I have
merely hinted, not mentioning one or two of its principal conditions.
My secret is of such vast importance that it would go a great way to
revolutionize science, history, and even religion, and I dare not
divulge it to the world at large. The more I think over the matter,
the more convinced I am that my experiments have so lifted the veil of
death, that I have stepped within the bounds of things which should be
unknown to man.

I have passed the Rubicon of the supernatural!

I tremble at my own temerity.

I have now but one Gordian knot to sever. Shall my secret die with me,
and so save the civilized world much anxiety, or shall I divulge it to
a small coterie of the world’s greatest philosophers, and allow them
to work upon and improve my ideas, so that they may benefit mankind,
without revealing the secret power, which in profane hands would prove
but a curse?

For the present the secret shall remain _mine alone_, but what I may
decide to do with it in the future, who knows?

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not every day that one has an opportunity of receiving a
millionaire as a guest, and to have the privilege of hypnotizing one is
a still rarer thing, yet both these experiences have been mine at one
and the same time, and I will relate how it happened.

I was staying for a few days on the Cornish coast, and had drawn my van
far on to the beach, by the side of a rivulet which, coming down from
low neighbouring hills, murmured and tumbled along its rocky bed until
it lost itself in the immeasurable sea.

My van was placed near some rocky cliffs, in such a position as to be
snug and secluded, and yet so as to retain a view up the lovely valley
through which the little river sparkled and foamed. I selected the spot
because of its quietude and beauty; I do not care for the annoyance of
children, or the obtrusive curiosity of their elders, when they can
easily be avoided by a little forethought.

Once or twice I noticed a tall, middle-aged gentleman roaming quietly
among the rocks and pools left by the low tide, and on one occasion
passed the seal of day with him in a casual manner; but, as he seemed
to be of a retiring disposition, I did not attempt to force my company
upon him, and passed on.

One day I sat on a rock observing a wonderful storm-clouded sky; I
watched the great, massive, vapour clouds rolling in from the west,
growing blacker and denser each minute. I noticed the hush of the air
and the subsidence of the wind, and so did the little birds, for they
flew twittering overhead to hide themselves from the approaching storm.
Then from the clouds burst the vivid zig-zags of lightning, and the
accompanying roar of crashing thunder, gradually coming nearer and
nearer, more frequent and louder. Presently, with a sudden blast, the
wind came hurtling down with startling force and fury, licking up the
sand and shingle as it drove along; and behind it came the rain, first
a few sparse drops, then a full downpour, and finally a rushing torrent.

This drove me into the welcome shelter of my van; but although I
securely closed the door it could not keep, from my startled ears, the
thunder crashes, as they reverberated and rolled among the stupendous
granite cliffs of the coast. My van shook, and my eyes were blinded
by several intense flashes of the discharged electric element, which
lighted up the wet rocks and the wind-swept pools with a luridly grand
but awful effect.

The cliffs appeared as if they were being shattered and tumbled
piecemeal to the shingle below, when an unmistakable tap, tap, tap
rattled upon my door, and I fancied I heard a voice, but the crashing
and roaring noises around me were so great that I paused before opening
the door for a repetition of the sound. Indeed my nerves were strung up
to such an intense pitch that, when the taps were repeated in a louder
manner, I felt afraid to open, for fear of letting in some weird spirit
of the storm.

Nervous, however, as I felt, I arose, and at the door, craving my van’s
humble shelter, was the silent gentleman I had spoken to a day or two
previously. I welcomed him in, but he was already wet to the skin. That
did not at all matter; I had plenty of dry clothes, which fitted him
like his own--both his and my inches being more than those allotted to
the average mortal.

In an hour the storm was over, the sun once more shone brilliantly over
the heaving waters, while the larks rose warbling in the air, carolling
their hymn of praise for the return of the welcome sunshine.

My guest accepted my invitation to stay and dine with me, and I found
him a very pleasant companion. He helped me to prepare and cook the
meal, and in the interval we played cribbage, smoked, and chatted.

He had come down to Cornwall, he informed me, to escape from his
friends and mankind in general, for, having inherited some money, he
was worried and pestered on all sides by impecunious persons and
institutions; and to come to a place where he was unknown was his only
means of obtaining a little peace, “far from the madding crowd.”

Of course I brought hypnotism upon the _tapis_ during dinner, and after
the meal was discussed, he requested me to try my hand upon him, which
of course I gladly did, with the result of obtaining from him the
following story of “Two Ruined Towers.”

I must here point out that, though while in a hypnotic trance I can
cause my patient to tell me a story, yet when at its conclusion I
awaken him, he does not remember a word of what he has divulged, and
I do not on all occasions enlighten him; for, as I am at times the
recipient of most remarkable family secrets, crimes, and misdeeds, I
dare not commit to print a tithe of what is related to me.




II.

TWO RUINED TOWERS.


When about three-and-twenty years of age I had the misfortune to lose
my father, an event which altered the whole course of my life, and
nearly unhinged my mind. My father was an artist of some repute, and as
I also loved the work, I had an ardent wish to follow in his footsteps.

At seventeen I left school, and immediately commenced my artistic
studies under my father. I also became a student at the ---- Art
School, at which, when I was about twenty years of age, I had the good
fortune to gain a travelling scholarship of £100 a year for two years.
The first summer I spent in the British Isles, eking out my scholarship
money with the help of a small allowance from my good parent.

The winter I spent in my father’s studio, and in the following spring
packed up my few belongings, and bidding my father farewell, travelled
to various parts of the continent, making my way gradually south
as the cold weather approached. Thus, roving about, I picked up a
fair knowledge of two or three languages, and when my time of travel
expired, found myself in Sicily, from whence, crossing over to Naples,
I spent my last few pounds in procuring a passage home on a P. & O.
steamer bound for dear old England.

On my arrival I lost no time in sending a telegram to my father,
advising him that he might expect me on the following day. I kept my
word, and arrived at the time I had mentioned, but, alas! I found my
dear old father on a sick-bed, and was only just in time to bid him a
long farewell, for he died two days after my return home.

The shock was so great to my nervous system that I too became ill, and
for a long time was in grave danger, hovering between life and death,
but, by careful nursing and skilful medical treatment, I eventually
pulled through. My nerves were greatly shaken at the awful home-coming
I had experienced, and the knowledge that I had not written to my
father for three weeks previous to coming to England, so that he might
know where to address me, preyed greatly upon my mind. I could not help
thinking that, had my father been able to communicate with me, I might
have returned sooner, and by so doing have possibly saved his life. I
felt somehow guilty of a kind of moral parricide, and blamed myself for
all that had happened.

It was more than I could bear to enter the studio; everything about the
place served to call up memories of the past; even the trees around the
old house seemed to whisper as I walked beneath them, “ingrate.”

I could not bear it.

I felt hysterical and delirious, talking and groaning in my sleep; and
during the day roaming about the house like one distraught.

The doctor diagnosed the case at once, and told me plainly that I must
choose one of two things--a lunatic asylum or foreign travel.

Feeling his opinion to be a sound one, I naturally chose the latter
alternative.

Once more I packed up my impedimenta and crossed to Dieppe, from whence
I wandered, without any decided route, across France into Switzerland,
from thence making my way gradually southward into Italy.

I sketched and painted, selling several of my drawings to tourists who
happened to see me at work, and, I suppose, admired my productions.
Painting and wandering were my day amusements, but at night I had
another source of relaxation and forgetfulness, and that was my flute.
Upon this instrument I played fairly well, and it was my constant
practice, whenever I was in a favourable place, after my evening meal,
to bring forth my instrument and set the peasants dancing. They loved
to hear the merry English airs, and became quite excited over the
various dance tunes I played them. Minuets, jigs, strathspeys, reels,
and hornpipes, all found favour with them, and their attempts to keep
step with the more lively measures were sure to bring forth a deal of
good-natured banter, mirth, and merriment. I always placed a tin cup at
my feet, into which the dancers could drop a small coin if they felt so
disposed, and this little collection I invariably gave to relieve any
case of distress or poverty in the village. The poor peasants looked
upon me as a very strange fellow, for they could not understand why
it was I played for money and then gave it all away again, sometimes
adding to the fund from my own somewhat slender purse.

Thus I wandered, week after week, as fancy led me, being sure of
a good reception in each village I stopped at, for my fame as an
artist-musician preceded me, and wherever I stayed for the night a
crowd would invariably assemble outside my window, ready for me to
step out flute in hand when I had finished my evening meal.

One day I found a peculiarly effective “bit” to transfer to my canvas.
It was a lonely, mountainous district I was in, and I had tumbled
across some finely-coloured rocks, picturesquely-disposed trees, a
ruined chapel, and a turbulent, dashing, little waterfall.

I unstrapped my light-folding easel and set to work. It was a beautiful
day, and I toiled on for several hours, singing and whistling quietly
to keep myself in countenance and spirits, for I did not see a soul in
this lonely spot.

At last I began to grow tired of my painting, and, as the shadows
were beginning to lengthen, I packed up, and was about to foot it to
the nearest village some four miles distant, when, mingled with the
peculiar noises made by the sound of falling water, I fancied I could
hear the moaning either of a human being or some animal, apparently in
great distress or pain.

Listening, I caught the sound of what I took to be a faint groan!

I placed my kit upon the ground and looked around. At first I could see
nothing; but after a moment’s search I discovered an old man sitting
among the rocks, moaning and groaning at some serious injury he had
apparently received.

Forgetting where I was, I addressed the old man in English.

“Hallo, old fellow, what’s amiss with you?”

He suddenly brought me to myself by replying in good English (although
spoken with a foreign accent), and informing me that whilst sitting
under a rocky cliff, contemplating the beautiful solitude, a large
portion of stone had become detached, and rolling upon his foot, had
severely crushed and cut it.

He was a man apparently seventy years of age, with an aquiline nose,
piercing dark eyes, whose depth and brilliancy were enhanced by the
whiteness of his over-hanging eyebrows, and a fine flowing white beard.
All this I took in with an artist’s eye, and made a mental note not to
lose an opportunity, by and by, of painting such a wonderfully fine
head, if the old man would allow me.

I tore up my pocket-handkerchief, bound up the poor crushed foot, after
bathing it with cool water from the river, and set my old friend, who
was profuse in his thanks, upon his feet. I ought perhaps say foot, for
he could not place his injured foot to the ground, and consequently was
unable to walk. I was in a dilemma; the nearest village being a smart
hour’s walk away, down in the valley.

“Cheer up, father,” said I; “allow me to try and carry you a little;
possibly we may meet some one as we descend the road.”

“Nay, nay, my son,” the old man replied, “leave me. Perhaps after a
rest I may be able to put my foot to the ground and proceed on my way.”

“No, that will never do, old gentleman; do you not know that wolves
haunt these rocky heights, and would probably devour you in the night
if you were left here by yourself and unarmed?”

“Ah, a sweet death, my son, but, alas! wolves cannot harm me.”

I looked at him in amazement as he uttered these words, but concluded
the pain had made him somewhat delirious and wild in his talk. Then I
took him in my strong young arms and carried him down the rugged path,
halting every now and again to recover breath and rest my aching limbs;
for, although my burden was but a bag of bones, still, on a rough
mountain path, his weight began to tell before I had gone a mile, and
I feared I should become exhausted long before we reached the village
whither we were bound.

Again and again I lifted the old man and carried him onward, but each
time I noticed the distance was less than the previous effort had
covered, and after struggling on for a couple of miles, I was forced to
give in for a long spell of rest. We were now down upon the plain, and
the sun was fast approaching the horizon, when my eye suddenly lighted
upon an ox feeding in a little green hollow a couple of hundred yards
off. Knowing that in Southern Europe oxen, to a great extent, take the
place of horses, I approached it; feeling sure that if it were an ox
broken to work, I could give my old friend a comfortable ride to the
village upon its ample back.

The animal stood and stared at me with its great soft eyes, and
I stared back in return, but having no knowledge of the handling
of cattle, I was at a loss to know what to do next. It was an
intelligent-looking creature, so I coaxingly spoke to it in English,
trusting that if its education had not been neglected it might
understand that I meant it no harm. I took it by one of its horns, and,
to my joy, the gentle beast was good enough to follow me; and as it did
so I looked at its neck and could see where the yoke had galled it, by
which I knew it was used for agricultural purposes.

We soon got to understand each other, and when I lifted the old man on
its back, and supported him there, the ox moved off quietly to the
village, which we reached just as the light had passed through that
stage which poets and learned men call crepuscular.

We found a comfortable inn, and there I attended the old man for two
or three days; but I must own my attention was not altogether due to
philanthropic motives, as I spent much of each day in painting the
grand old head of my patient. As I painted, so the old man talked; and
I soon discovered he had a wonderful memory, especially for historic
subjects: he appeared to have the history of Europe and Western Asia
at his fingers’ ends. He would have made a splendid historian, for he
could remember not only the chief events of the subject he happened to
speak upon, but a great many of the minor details which go to make up
an important episode in history.

His conversation thrilled me, and during some of his vivid recitals I
ceased painting, and sat down to listen as one spellbound. He commenced
with the struggles of the early Christians, graphically described the
decline of the Roman power, and the rise of the Northern and Western
nations.

Then he became eloquent upon the Conquest of England, knowing that
I was a native of that land, and so minutely described the field of
Hastings, that one might have imagined he had been an eyewitness. He
spoke of the persons of William and Harold, the weapons and armour
used, and could answer my queries so exactly, that I began to fear
there was something decidedly uncanny about my model. From the Conquest
he took me, in thought and word, right through the Crusades, and with
sparkling eyes described the principal actors on the bloody fields of
Holy Land, and when describing the prowess and fierceness in battle of
our Richard Cœur de Lion, he became so excited in his recital, that,
despite his injured foot, he rose from his couch in the centre of the
room, and taking up a mahl-stick, struck and thrust in all directions,
to explain to me how he of the lion’s heart bore himself.

I was speechless with amazement; my crippled patient was dancing about
the room with the vigour of a youth of twenty, quite regardless of the
mangled foot, which apparently gave him but little concern, and less
pain.

“My friend,” I exclaimed loudly, “your foot!--think of your injuries!
Your description is wonderful, magnificent, but do not forget your
crippled state!”

“Ha!” he returned, “seven times seven have passed over me, and my foot
is perfect again. See!”

Saying which he tore off the bandages, and exhibited to my startled
eyes a foot without even a scar.

I now began to feel a strange fear creeping over me, and I asked
him what he meant by “seven times seven passing over him?” To which
question, as near as I can recollect, his reply was this.

“My friend, I will tell you what my meaning is, on one condition--that
for three months from now you will not divulge a word of what I am
about to speak to you. If you do, may the burden of your insincerity be
on your own head! You have proved yourself a friend to a stranger, and
the fact of your not knowing whom you have assisted, makes your act one
of greater charity, and your kindness, like that of the Good Samaritan
in my young days, shall be rewarded ere we part.”

What, I thought, does he mean by the Good Samaritan of his youth? I
knew of but one: he of whom we read in the New Testament parable;
and I was about to ask him the meaning of this second enigma, when
he motioned me not to interrupt, and proceeded with his remarkable
monologue.

“By ‘seven times seven’ I mean, that although an accident may befall
me, as it may any other man, yet, after seven times seven hours have
passed away, I shall be sound again.

“I am keenly sensible to pain and to all human feelings, but _I cannot
know death_!

“No, between death and myself a gulf has been fixed by my Master, and
though corporeal pain may for seven times seven hours rack and torture
me, I am at the end of that period whole again, even though I were
wounded ten times fatally.

“I am the deathless one!”

At the aspect and demeanour of my weird companion I could have shrieked
with fear; his eyes were incandescent in their blazing lustre, and the
locks of his beard and hair writhed to my astonished eyes like the
living locks of a Gorgon.

“The stories I told you of past centuries were no mere tales gathered
from books, but were from my own personal observations.

“I stood in Rome when it was in flames; I saw with these very eyes
the martyrdom of the early Christians; I walked through the length
and breadth of Europe while Rome, with all its power and glories, was
passing away. At Hastings I stood beside brave Harold, when a short
arrow, taking him in the eye, pierced brain and skull, and he fell dead
beside me. I have seen the Saracens fall like mast in the autumn before
the trained arms of the bold Crusaders; and when Napoleon’s army fled
from Moscow I too followed them.

“I have felt the fierce rays of the Eastern sun and the biting winds
and frost of dreary Lapland.

“I have courted dangers and death in all forms, but here, after
centuries, I stand before you a living mortal covered with the cloak of
immortality.”

“Heaven help you, poor man!” I cried; “you must be distraught; mayhap
much learning has weakened your brain. Rest, good father, I implore
you. Rest on this couch, you will be better soon.”

“Rest, rest!!” he wildly exclaimed, “there is no rest for me, nay, not
even in the peaceful grave. Often and often have I stood in Death’s
path, and have felt the icy coldness of his breath, but, alas! he has
ever passed me by unheeded.”

“Surely,” said I, “you do not tell me that you are he who is doomed to
walk this rolling earth till the Master bids thy penance be no more?”

“Ay,” he replied, “I am he--he whom men, without knowing my true name,
call ‘The Wandering Jew’!”

I could scarcely believe my senses. Was the man mad? or was I mad? or
was it all a phantasy of my brain?

My guest held out his hand to me, which I mechanically clutched; then
drawing me to the couch, we sat down together.

“Forgive me, my young friend, for the shock I have caused you. Your
kindness has touched my heart, and for that kindness I will repay you,
as in times past I have occasionally rewarded others of my true friends.

“Now,” he continued, lowering the tone of his voice to a kindly pitch,
“I dare say you have read of a certain mighty personage, who, in
the early days of Christianity, was returning with great spoils from
a neighbouring country, when he was hard beset by the enemy, who,
with allies, followed close upon his heels; and how to save the vast
treasures he had taken, turned aside the course of a certain river, and
at dead of night buried his spoils there, deflecting the river to its
true course again ere daydawn.”

I bowed assent.

“Now,” he continued, “I know the country where this took place, and
can not only point out the very river, but the identical spot in the
river where that treasure still lies hidden. Have you the perseverance,
vigour, and endurance to bring that vast hoard to the light of day
again? If so it shall be yours!”

Hardly knowing what I was saying I replied in the affirmative, and
after further conversation we retired for the night.

We stayed a day or two longer at the inn to procure mules and other
necessaries, and then rode off upon our distant quest.

After weeks of wandering through mountains and valleys we came to a
river which flowed through a beautifully diversified country; hilly,
rocky, and well clothed with trees and luxurious foliage.

Riding along the river’s bank we came to a very lonely spot,--a long
glen--through which the river peacefully flowed in meandering curves
and foaming falls. The end of the valley broadened out into a level
plain of considerable extent, and in the midst of this plain stood the
crumbling remains of two ancient towers, of which little more than the
foundations remained.

“Here,” said my guide, “we halt; there lies our treasure,” saying
which he pointed to the deep, silent stream flowing between the two
massive towers.

“Now,” he continued, “you must follow out the plan I have devised for
regaining the wealth which lies hidden there, and carry out everything
just as I desire you.

“At the small town of Y---- hard by lives the owner of this land. You
will assume the character of a wealthy but eccentric (or partly mad)
Englishman. You are enchanted with the beautiful views in the glen
yonder, and wish to stay here for a long period, to paint pictures and
to generally enjoy yourself. You would like a two-roomed cottage built
near one of the towers, that you may live and sleep amid the scenery
you so love to depict. You will pay liberally.

“That is all I ask you to do. We will proceed at once to the town and
make these very necessary arrangements. I am your mentor, your tutor,
should prying people desire to know why an old man accompanies you.

“At Alexandria I have a friend, to whom I must write for certain
necessary implements to be sent to us, without which it will be in vain
to attempt our quest. To procure these implements shall be _my_ task.
They must be sent to the nearest port, and thence may easily be brought
here on the backs of mules.

“D---- is the nearest port, and there my friend Isaac Susha is
harbour-master; on my bidding he will send the goods here, free from
all observation or suspicion. In the mean time our little house will
be building, and you can amuse yourself with your painting, while I
elaborate my plans and ply my angling rod, for there is much fish in
this river. I shall make an ideal fisherman, for a flowing beard points
to the contemplative man, and your true angler is certainly of a
contemplative mind; such a man was your English Izaak Walton.”

In due course the little house was built, and the implements or goods,
supposed to be furniture, etc., arrived in six heavy cases borne on the
backs of mules. The muleteers were paid and dismissed, and in a short
time people ceased to regard us as a kind of show, and we were left in
peace and quietness, except for an occasional couple who would stroll
along in the evening to look at the mad Englishman and his keeper! Now
and again an old shepherd, whose flocks nibbled the juicy pasture of
the plain, would come and pay his respects to us, and watch the picture
growing on my canvas; but after nightfall we were never disturbed, for
the people of the district were very superstitious; and as the towers
had the reputation of being haunted, we were free from all interruption
after dark.

I unscrewed the packing-cases, and found they contained sundry
articles of furniture, such as folding-chairs, folding iron bedsteads,
cutlery, culinary ware, etc.; but in one of the cases was a complete
diving suit, helmet, overalls, tubing, lead weight, heavy boots, and
everything that a diver requires, even to a submarine lantern. Another
case contained an air pump, extra tubing, crowbars, and sundry gear.

My old friend chuckled with delight at my surprise, and his eyes
sparkled as we commenced putting the apparatus together.

“Now,” said he, “the inhabitants of this country are, as you know from
the legend of the haunted towers which you have heard, very suspicious,
and probably we shall have some official or other, making it his
business to call upon us occasionally, to see what is going on, and
it will never do to let him see the pump and diving apparatus, or we
should at once be haled before some dignitary, and charged with having
dealings with the Evil One. Now I have a proposition to make, which is
this--our bedroom lies next the river, and I suggest that beneath the
floor we hollow out a small chamber, about seven feet square, in which
we can keep both the pump and diving suit from observation, so that at
whatever time during the day any one chooses to call, nothing will be
in view to betray us.”

“Agreed!” I exclaimed; “a capital proposal; we will set to work this
very night. We will excavate, and as we dig up the earth I will carry
it in a basket to the river’s brink and throw it in.”

“Very well,” said the ancient Jew, “I will delve, and you shall be the
beast of burden, as you suggest, for you are the stronger man.”

“But,” I queried, “as you delve beneath the surface you will find it
very wet, you will catch your death from cold, and have your limbs set
fast with rheumatism.”

The old Jew laughed and replied, “Death--pah! You forget, my friend,
who I am. Come, let us commence.”

I looked at my wonderful old comrade and shuddered.

In a fortnight we had our secret room prepared, and everything was
ready to commence our search.

The Jew had informed me that the two towers were built by the great
General, some weeks after the treasure was hidden, at a time when
he had reasserted his power, and was once more in possession of the
country hereabouts. In the towers he placed watchmen and tax-gatherers,
whose duty it was to levy toll from each vessel passing up or down the
river; at least this was what he gave forth, but it was in reality to
guard the treasure lying buried in the bed of the river, which at a
convenient time he purposed recovering.

For some years he was harassed by the enemy, and at length died,
whereupon the enemy retook the country, and the new ruler, not being
aware of the treasure buried in the river, carried on the custom of
demanding toll, as he considered it a capital institution.

Years went by, men and manners changed, and the towers were neglected
and fell into decay; but around the hoary ruins many curious legends
gathered, and among others one which came very near the truth, as
it told of an ancient king, who, in flight, being hard pressed by
his pursuers, was in such haste to cross the river that the boat was
overset, the king and many others drowned, and a great deal of valuable
_spoil lost in the river_.

The Jew smiled at this particular story, and remarked that although,
like the legend, his was only hearsay, yet, as he received his account
first-hand from a friend who was _an eyewitness_ of the diversion of
the river and the subsequent burial of the treasure, there could be
but little romance about his version, which he averred was solid,
substantial fact.

“Now,” he observed in conclusion, “I am positive that the treasure was
buried midway between those two towers, but whether after the flight
of all these centuries we shall find it, or in what form we shall find
it, I cannot say; but if you are willing we will make the search, and
if successful the whole shall be yours; I require nothing! The mere
search is ample reward for me, as it serves to break the monotony of my
existence.”

We commenced diving operations in a very timid manner, or at least I
did, for although I had witnessed divers at work, I had never before
had any actual experience; still, as the Jew said, “There was no hurry.”

The first few nights were spent in fitting up the apparatus, in making
experimental dives, and in concocting a signal code that we might
understand each other, etc.

The sensation of submarine diving has so often been described that I
will not attempt to state what my feelings were at the outset of the
operations; suffice it to say that they were far from pleasant, but
with practice I soon became expert, especially as the deepest part of
the water was not more than twenty feet, so that I did not suffer much
from compression.

I quickly discovered that the bed of the river was somewhat muddy,
that is to say, there was a deposit of several inches of mud or soft
earth, resting upon a substratum of gravel. In some parts large beds of
weeds were to be seen sailing their long fronds upward to a height of
several feet: these I quickly cut away, and with great labour at length
succeeded in clearing away the upper layer of soft ooze nearly from
bank to bank, and for a width of perhaps twenty yards near the centre.

We worked four “turns” per night of an hour each, with an interval
of half-an-hour between each dive, so that we were occupied from 10
p.m. till 4 a.m., when we went to bed and slept till 10 o’clock,
beside obtaining several little daylight snoozes when all was quiet.
The Sunday was to us a true Sabbath, and no manner of work was done,
not even cooking; we reserved that day for prayer, meditation,
conversation, and much-needed rest.

We had now been working for six whole weeks, but though everything
was in perfect working order, and the river-bed was being cleared, we
had no more knowledge of the exact location of the spoil than when we
arrived three months previously.

The real toil now commenced; for digging in the river-bed had to be
undertaken at depths varying from fifteen to twenty feet beneath the
surface. To dig on dry land a hole of four or five feet in depth is a
comparatively easy task, but to dig a hole of like depth _under water_
is a most arduous undertaking, a task requiring strength, perseverance,
and much patience. Tools used under water are difficult to manage, and
by reason of the resistance of the water lose half their efficacy. For
instance, a strong man wielding a heavy hammer under water, although
he may strive his hardest, and exert his full strength, can only make
his blow of the same force that a child of ten could strike on _terra
firma_, because the water resists his arm and the fall of the hammer,
in proportion to the area of surface of his arms and the implement. I
also found that when using a spade I could only remove a portion of
a spadeful each time, as the current and swirl of water floated the
lighter particles off, leaving only the heavier pieces upon the blade
of the spade; thus digging holes in the expectation of finding the
treasure was a wearisome task, especially as I had to cease my work at
frequent intervals, to allow the turbid water, thick with sediment, to
become clear enough for me to see what I was about. Thus toiling on,
another five weeks passed wearily away, without the least trace of our
quest being discovered.

The Jew at length began to weary of pumping air to me, and I of diving
and delving, so we resolved to take a few days’ rest, and decide what
further steps we should take in our search.

The river was about forty yards wide, and although I had sunk about
a dozen pits in the bed of the stream, I had discovered absolutely
nothing.

I thought the matter carefully over each day, but could only come to
the conclusion that we were either searching in the wrong place, or
that the treasure had long since been washed away and lost. Still, I
could not imagine how even the swiftest torrent could affect or move
anything buried beneath the river-bed at a depth of four or five feet.
Then it struck me that earthquakes were not unknown in the region, and
a shock might have caused an upheaval of the river-bed, by which the
treasure might have been exposed and washed away centuries ago by some
unusually heavy flood. If this had happened, was it not also probable
that the stumps of the two towers would have been rent and cracked in
many places?

Certainly it was.

I therefore examined the ruined towers, but their foundations were
perfect, save for a few superficial fractures. I thereupon concluded
that my earthquake theory was not tenable.

I next examined the banks on each side of the river, especially the
portion immediately _between the towers and the water_, and found that
on one side, the side farthest from our hut or cottage, solid rock
formed the principal part of the bank. From the tower on that bank to
the brink of the water was a distance of just fifty feet; but the tower
on our side of the river stood within ten feet of the water, and the
foundation stood upon an ordinary layer of earth, with an under stratum
of gravel similar to the bed of the river.

My old friend and I could see nothing in this to assist us in any way;
but when I retired to rest that night I could not help asking myself
the question, “Why does one tower stand fifty feet from the water and
the other only ten?”

Was it not probable that whoever built the towers would erect them at
equal distances from the river? And again--If one tower were required
for some reason to be nearer the water than the other, would it not be
the one which was built upon the solid rock?

Over these questions I pondered and worried half through the night,
while my old comrade snored away as peacefully and regularly as he had
done any time during the past nineteen centuries.

Before I joined my companion in a nasal duet I came to the following
conclusions:--

1. Probably centuries ago the river had been much narrower.

2. A river does not keep its exact course for ever: many things may
cause it to change its course.

3. This river had not diverged much from its original course, as proved
by the towers; but if it had diverged at all it was towards the eastern
tower (cottage side).

4. The towers were exactly one hundred and eighty feet apart, but the
true centre of the river would be forty feet from the west bank and
eighty feet from the east bank.

5. River _beds_ may rise or fall from their original level, by
deposits of earthy particles settling, and thus covering up what was
once the true river-bed; or by a swift river scouring off the upper
surface of the bed, which would thus eventually expose anything hidden
at a depth of five or six feet below the bed.

6. The deepest part of a river is usually in the centre, and there
would probably be the spot where anything in the way of treasure would
be buried, because of the greater inaccessibility.

Next day the Jew and I held a consultation, when we decided, after
carefully weighing the above ideas, that I should cut a trench five
feet deep and twenty or thirty yards long, from north to south, along
the bed of the river in a line with its course, and at a distance of
forty feet from the west bank, a spot which we surmised to be the
centre of the river in ancient times.

Again night after night I toiled, and for three weeks I dug and delved,
but this time not _quite_ in vain, for at the end of this period I came
upon a hard substance which I supposed to be just what I had struck my
spade upon many times before--a stone. I took it in my hand, for the
water was too turbid to see anything clearly beneath its surface, and
felt it to be much too heavy for a flint of the size of one’s fist.
Probably it was metal!

My heart beat swiftly as I ascended.

I took it to the hut and examined it. It was indeed metal--it was gold!

We gazed upon it for some time, and then, placing it upon the table, I
capered round it with delight. The Jew was very calm over it.

“Wait,” said he; “this may only be a solitary nugget dropped from a
boat, or thrown into the stream by some thief to hide his guilt.”

I went soberly to work again, taking with me a small basket weighted
with stones to prevent it floating away. I dug, and again struck upon
large nuggets, which I placed in the basket; I also found pieces of
metal which had evidently been shaped by human hands, although they
were in such a corroded state that I could only surmise what had once
been their shape or use. I washed off the adhering gravel and took my
find ashore to the hut, trembling with excitement as I did so.

Hurrah! every piece was pure gold! gold!! gold!!! Then, being
thoroughly exhausted by my long dive and the excitement of my
discovery, I frightened my companion nearly out of his wits by
fainting, and falling like a log of timber at his feet.

When I awoke it was broad daylight, and I was lying comfortably in my
cot, but with a very bad headache.

I groaned, for it at once flashed across my mind that the basket of
gold was, after all, nothing but a dream, a delusion!

Calling my friend from the other room, and glaring at him the while, I
asked half-a-dozen questions before he could answer one.

“Calm yourself, my son, and I will answer all your questions, but not
before you give me your word that nothing shall excite you. Remember,
that in your overwrought state, with a burning brain, an enfeebled
frame, and a naturally excitable temperament, such a thing as madness
might overtake you, or an attack of brain fever seize you.”

“Father, I will be a very Stoic; nothing shall unduly move me.”

“Prove then that you can control your feelings by not asking me a
single question till you have eaten your breakfast.”

I obeyed; but how every morsel stuck in my throat, and had literally
to be washed down with coffee. The apparently everlasting meal was at
length finished, and again I put my numerous questions, and recounted
my dream of the basket of gold. Then with a gesture intended to compose
me, the Jew drew forth from a locker the basket of gold, and held it
out to my astonished gaze.

“Gold!” I exclaimed, stretching out my trembling hand.

“Yes, gold,” said the Jew, quietly placing the basket upon the table as
if it contained apples. “Gold, simple gold; would you be so weak as to
addle your brain for a basketful of the vile dross? It is at once the
curse and blessing of humanity; it kills and it saves; it blackens the
pure, and gilds vice; it creates and it destroys, and more often paves
the way to hell than builds a ladder to heaven.”

What my friend said upon gold would fill many pages, but to shorten
these remarks I will simply say that his eloquence and force of
argument were so great, that I presently became infected with his ideas
of the metal before me. I had been like a man drunk with gold, but had
now become sober with advice.

My fevered brain quieted down, and I simply resolved in my mind that
I should be a rich man. Well! what of that, there were plenty of rich
men in the world who lived and enjoyed their wealth, but then--unlike
my ancient friend--a few short years would bring them face to face with
that great harvestman, Death, and what of the riches then?

In a day or two, having with the Jew’s kind nursing and attention
quieted my mind, I re-commenced my work, and found many more baskets of
gold of various shapes; battered crowns, cups, shield bosses, rings,
and ornaments of all kinds, many of them with gems in them, were
brought to the surface; and one night as I lay in bed, it came into my
head that I would the next night bring ashore a basketful of the loose
gravel, and examine it to see if any small pieces of gold were among it.

Accordingly the next night, as most of the large pieces of gold had
been gathered, I filled my basket with gravel, and took it to the hut,
where I spread it forth on the table.

To our astonishment, not only did we discover small pieces of gold, but
precious stones, cut and uncut, were to be seen sparkling amid the heap
of gravel. The gravel was of more value than the lumps of gold!

The cut gems we put carefully by in a box, and those in a rough state,
which we had more difficulty in finding because they were of a dull and
lustreless surface, we placed in a large leathern bag.

I found I had literally been shovelling up precious stones when I
fancied I was digging gravel, but now that I was aware of the value
of the gravel-bed, I carefully brought every basketful ashore, and
together we sorted over the contents.

For several weeks, night by night, I continued my work of diving, until
nature gave out, and I became completely prostrate, and by my old
friend’s advice resolved to give up seeking for more valuables. I had
gold of ten times my own weight, several leathern bags of natural uncut
gems, about a peck of beautiful cut jewels, and enough ring-seals
and ornaments to stock a museum; I was rich beyond my most extravagant
dreams. I was twice over a millionaire!

[Illustration: “Precious stones, cut and uncut, were to be seen
sparkling amid the heap of gravel.”--_p. 58._]

The Wandering Jew had but a few more days to be with me, for he may not
sojourn at one place more than six months, and that privilege is only
allowed him once in each century; at other times a calendar month is
his longest stay at any place. Usually he tramps from place to place,
halting but a short time at each town or village; at other times he
undertakes long journeys among the Caucasus Mountains, the Urals, or
the Alps; at other times he hies him to Norway, Finland, and even
Siberia. These journeys he undertakes with no other encumbrance than a
long staff. He can accomplish feats that would be impossible to other
mortals: no wild animal dare attack him; cold he can feel but it cannot
harm him; sleep has no hold upon him when he wills himself to remain
awake, nor does hunger have any pangs for him, as he is able to fast
for weeks at a time without any great inconvenience. He speaks many
languages and knows many countries. He wants for nothing, as he has the
power of willing persons to give him exactly what he may require, not
_against_ their will, but with pleasure to themselves.

For the few days which remained we occupied ourselves in packing
and forwarding the boxes by different routes, and under different
disguises, to my home in distant England, in which I longed once more
to set foot.

I endeavoured in every way to obtain the real name of my generous old
friend, but without success, and am sorry to say he did not even give
me the opportunity of thanking him for having made me a millionaire,
for one stormy morning when I arose I found myself alone; my comrade
had flown, leaving upon the table a scrap of paper bearing these words--

  “My son, riches added neither to the honour nor happiness of the great
  king Solomon; how, then, shall they bring _thee_ peace--that peace
  which is the spirit of happiness--except by doing good with that which
  earth and water have yielded up to thee?

  “Do good with thy riches, and thy fellow men shall bless and reverence
  thee.

  “Use thy riches in a selfish or discreditable manner, and thy gold
  shall turn to lead as thou graspest it, and drag thee deep down to an
  eternal doom. Fare thee well.

                                             “(Signed) JOHN XXI., xxiv.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Many were the schemes which racked my brain for turning my valuables
into money; and for a long time after returning to England I did not
know how to proceed, but at length hit upon a plan. The very numerous
relics of pagan times I presented, under various assumed names, to
museums throughout the kingdom. The gold I had no difficulty in
disposing of to the large manufacturing jewellers in Birmingham. The
uncut precious stones I occasionally send in parcels of a thousand to
M. Koster of Amsterdam, who for the past ten years has set apart a
wing of his great establishment, containing twenty-five men, who are
constantly employed in cutting and polishing gems for me. These are
then sent to agents in all parts of the world, and disposed of, the
proceeds being placed to my account in the Bank of England.

I live as a wealthy country gentleman should, in good style, but
without ostentation. I travel a great deal in the summer, and to every
genuine call of distress my purse is open, but the cases requiring
pecuniary aid which come under my _personal_ observation are not nearly
enough to absorb the amount--about £100,000--which I wish to spend
yearly in charity and good philanthropic work. My money is distributed
over the British Isles to charities of every denomination under the
initials A. Z., which you have probably often seen in the daily
newspapers, and I trust I may live for many years to bestow my largesse
on cases and institutions worthy of aid.

I have more than I shall spend during my lifetime, but there is
doubtless a great deal more treasure in the river-bed which I
overlooked in my hasty search, and which could be made the means of
alleviating much suffering, wretchedness, and distress in this country,
if it were brought to light by some one who would search for it in a
more diligent and thorough manner than I did, and who would, when he
had secured it, put it to the same good use that I am doing. To whom
could I tell the secret of the whereabouts of the ruined towers, with
the certainty that he would carry out my wishes?

I wonder who would take up the search at the point at which I ceased?

By obtaining permission from the government of Z----, the river’s
course could be again deflected as it was in the early Christian days,
and the remaining treasure systematically and leisurely recovered.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was quite late when my guest left me that night, after having first
extracted from me the promise that I would call upon him at his humble
inn in the happy valley next day.

Having made a parcel of the still wet clothes I called next morning
upon my new friend, and spent the day with him, wandering about the
valley, and trying a cast with the fly. On parting in the evening
he informed me that he was to return to town next day, and I should
probably see him no more.

A day or two after his departure a man came down to the beach leading
a fine piebald mare, and inquiring if I were Mr. S----. I informed him
that that was my name, whereupon he gave me a note written in pencil,
reading thus--

  “MY DEAR FRIEND,

  “I cannot allow the day I spent in your cosy domicile on wheels to
  pass without some little acknowledgment of the courtesy shown me, and
  of the kindness you extended to a perfect stranger. By bearer I send
  you a magpie, which kindly accept as a remembrance of

                                             “Your obliged friend,
                                                      “H. K. K. (A. Z.)”

I have never seen H. K. K. since, although I think I could, if I
wished, make a very near guess at his real name and abode. The magpie
still tugs myself and home from place to place, the admired of all
beholders from the beauty of his peculiar markings. He makes my caravan
an object of extra interest wherever I go, simply because of the
superstitious belief that a piebald horse brings luck.

Some people _wish_ when they see my horse, others affirm that stroking
its glossy hide helps to realize their wish. Parents whose children
suffer from St. Vitus’s dance have asked me to allow the afflicted ones
to ride a little way on its back, in the belief that such exercise on a
parti-coloured steed will effect a cure.

A jockey about to ride a race on a certain occasion begged seven black
hairs from the tail of my horse and seven white ones from its mane. I
granted his request, and watched him bind the hairs carefully round the
handle of his riding-whip. I witnessed the race with more than usual
interest, and strangely enough the superstitious jockey WON his race by
a short head.

At more than one inn at which I have halted, the landlord would take
no money for the maintenance of my parti-coloured horse, saying that
bad luck would fall upon them if they charged for the keep of a “lucky”
horse.

So much for credulity and superstition!




III.

INTRODUCTION TO “A STRANGE RESURRECTION.”


While travelling along the Norfolk coast, and enjoying its golden sands
and bracing breezes, I fell in with a jolly old fellow who was mending
one of the huge oaken breakwaters, with which some parts of this
wind-swept coast are protected, to prevent the encroachment of the sea,
which, year by year and slice by slice, devours the soft clay cliffs,
as regularly and insatiably as a ploughboy consumes his thumbpiece
after the first two hours of morning work.

The jolly one had charge of a gang of half-a-dozen semi-amphibious
agricultural labourers, who were driving down the great iron-shod
piles deep into the sand, by means of an erection very similar in
construction to a guillotine, except that instead of the lunette a huge
block of iron weighing several hundredweight fell upon the pile to be
driven when a lever is pulled.

The men, with whom I conversed while they ate their noonday meal, were
of the usual type of tawny-bearded, brown-faced, straight-nosed men one
sees on the east coast, who, when not employed in farm work, gain their
scanty living on the sea. But the ganger was a man of a different
stamp; he was short and thick like a Shetland pony, and very nearly as
rugged and unkempt as one of those sturdy animals, for his iron-grey
beard and hair blew about in the wind like the tattered rags on a
mawkin.

He was a most jocular little-big man, full of fun and funny sayings,
and the loudest to laugh at his own jokes was--himself. His laugh was
hearty at any time, but on special occasions he would give a peculiar
roar that would quite startle any person not used to Billy Flowerdue’s
wild guffaw.

I invited Billy to spend an evening in my caravan, an invitation which
he readily accepted, as he was some miles from his home, and only at
present lodging in the inn of a neighbouring village.

Billy opened his eyes at many of the curiosities I had picked up during
my travels, and widest of all at a curious piece of work which had
been made by a man in the same line of business as himself--that of a
carpenter and wheelwright. It was a wooden leg, which had been made for
a cow, and which the animal had worn for several years, until she met
her death by lightning.

It was a curious contrivance made of two pieces of wood, jointed at the
knee with a pair of ordinary iron hinges, and made to fly out straight
when the animal arose from a recumbent position, by means of thick
india-rubber springs attached from the upper to the lower timbers.

If the powerfully-built little carpenter opened his eyes wide at what
he was pleased to call “that thayer cur’us contraption,” he did so even
more fully when I asked him to allow me to send him to sleep by a
peculiar power I possessed, and I quite believe he thought I was either
insane, bent on robbing him, or else thirsting for his blood.

I had, therefore, to fully explain the meaning of hypnotism to Billy,
who, although a masterful hand with the adze or chisel, had apparently
no brain for other subjects. His head was full of chips and timber,
and nothing more. By dint of persevering persuasion, he was at length
prevailed upon to permit me to place him in a state of trance, but
not until I had first placed my faithful collie “Skybo” in a mesmeric
sleep; at the sight of which Billy laughed loudly enough to make the
plates and crockery in my house on wheels rattle again.

I had no need to ask Billy to give up his mind, and allow himself to
think of just nothing at all, for it appeared a chronic state with him,
to which he relapsed after every laugh. When he did enter the trance
state he related the following very curious adventure of his early days.


A STRANGE RESURRECTION.

I am not what you may term an _old_ man, being a few months short of
sixty-five years, but though my years are totalling up considerably, my
spirits are light as a feather, and although fifty years have passed
away since the story I am about to tell you took place, the incidents
are as vivid in my memory as they were a month after their occurrence.

I was a youngster of fourteen or fifteen at the time I am about to
speak, and like most boys of that age had a liking for the sea,
especially as I dwelt in a great seaport where every one was in
some way or other connected with fish or ships, and where even the
schoolboys’ common expressions were flavoured with nautical terms.

My birthplace was Great Yarmouth, and at the time I left school in
1835, no one seemed to ask the question, which we so frequently hear
now, of “What are you going to do with your son?” because it seemed
predestined that the entrance of a boy into the world should be by way
of the high seas. Each boy at the age of fourteen or fifteen appeared
to look forward intuitively to the time when he should make his first
voyage, or join one of the great herring fleets which annually leave
Yarmouth in August; and he knew also that his maiden experience was
merely a test, to ascertain for what particular division of toilsome
nautical life he was most fitted.

Some liked the sea and its thrilling dangers, and stuck to it through
fair weather and foul, working their way upward, till in a very few
years they became mate, skipper, and presently part owner of the smack
or lugger they commanded. Others preferred shore life; the sea was too
coy a mistress for them to woo; and they were accordingly apprenticed
to sail or mast-makers, shipwrights, smiths, netmakers, or something
of the kind connected with shipping. Others again would volunteer for
service in Her Majesty’s Navy, being taken with the trim appearance of
the young fellows who had preceded them in that branch of the nautical
life, and came home on leave, to show off their little horde of gold
saved from their first cruise money.

Yet another set there were who, disdaining the toil of a fisher’s
life, the subordination of the navy, or of being always ashore at some
trade, chose the freer life which was led by those who were apprenticed
to the coasting or mercantile trade.

On leaving school I determined to see about me a little, and
accordingly cast in my lot with the latter group, and was in due course
enrolled as an apprentice on the books of _The Ladybird_, a smart
little trading brig, belonging to Yarmouth.

My father at the time kept an inn called the “Jolly Waggoner,” just
out of the town, on the Caister Road, and as it was early spring, the
various caravans were moving from their winter quarters, and their
owners painting and gilding up their properties ready for the round
of the fairs, which in Norfolk commence in the spring and run right
through the months, till Christmas and heavy snows put a stop to them
for the year.

At the side of the “Jolly Waggoner” was a large piece of spare
ground, upon which might frequently be seen four or five caravans
being repaired and painted; my father uniting in his own person the
businesses of painter, publican, carpenter, and smith; so that with one
thing and another he made a very fair living in a quiet way.

Well, a couple of days before _The Ladybird_ was to sail with a general
cargo to the Faroe Isles, the skipper, towards evening, came down to
my father’s house to settle about my premium money, and to give me an
opportunity of signing my indentures.

Captain Cooper, that was his name, was a jolly, genial man, full of fun
and merriment, and had the name for being a most able seaman; and as
he was part owner of the vessel, my father had no doubt that I should
be in good and safe hands. They were old schoolmates and life-long
friends, so, as Captain Cooper remarked, it would only be leaving one
father on shore to serve under another at sea--a kind of nautical
foster-father.

I was delighted when the indenture was pushed across the table to
receive my signature, and though I made a big blot to start with, I
afterwards signed my name very well, which was more than I could say
for either of my two fathers, for their hands were so stiff, and the
pen so scratchy, that they made very laborious work of it. The captain
wrote his name as much with his jaws as with his pen, for sticking his
tongue into his cheek, he elongated and rolled his lower jaw in a most
curious manner, apparently forming each letter with the tip of his
tongue on the inside of his cheek, and then simultaneously scrawling in
the same slow manner with the quill pen on the parchment before him.

My father signed with a big cross, so his task was soon over, but
still not before he had made the pen give a big splutter, just as a
sea-rocket does when it touches the water, and the ink flew in spray
from bottom to top of the important document.

By the time the witnesses had signed their names, and spattered their
share of ink over the indenture, the whole thing was highly decorated,
and looked for all the world like a map of some large city, showing by
black dots the positions of the various places of interest.

After such a Herculean task, much refreshment was required, supplied,
and in due course consumed.

I can fancy myself now sitting in the cosy bar-parlour--though it is
fifty years ago--listening to the wonderful yarns spun by Captain
Cooper; yarns which appeared to me to become more astounding as he
warmed up with the many and various liquids he imbibed.

Then I recollect a startling occurrence which happened in the midst
of the story-telling; it was the entrance of a travelling showman,
who wished to know if he could put up at our house for the night, as
he wanted some repairs done to his caravan next day. He was of medium
height, stoutish and florid, just the type of person one would expect
to be connected with the show business. He was a perfect stranger to
my father, but as there was work to be done for him in the morning, my
father bade him take his caravan upon the green, and after he and the
ostler had fixed up all for the night, come and have a comfortable pipe
and chat with us.

Jim, our ostler, accompanied the showman, and having stabled the
horse for the night, and put the van into a good berth, the showman
rejoined us. He proved to be a capital story-teller, as are most of his
profession. His tales, if anything, were more wonderful than Captain
Cooper’s; anyway, I never heard such stories as they told one against
the other, and I do not doubt that if I had glanced at myself in the
looking-glass, my eyes would have resembled small china tea-saucers. My
father did not call them stories, he used a harsher but shorter word;
but I, in my verdancy, imagining they _might_ be true, gave them the
benefit of the doubt, and swallowed them like so many sugar-plums.

Now the thing that fixes this scene so vividly on my memory was, that
while these men were so busy racking their brains for the toughest
yarns, the half-door leading into the bar was suddenly opened, and the
space filled with the huge form of a man, who inquired, in no amiable
strain, if the showman were going to sit there all night, and leave him
without so much as a quart to moisten his lips with.

The ceiling of the bar-parlour was certainly not lofty, being barely
seven feet from the floor, but to my surprise, and I might also add
horror, when the man pushed open the half-door and entered the room
he could not stand upright, so gigantic was his stature. His entrance
created quite a commotion among those present, but the showman soon
smoothed matters by ordering a gallon of ale, and telling us that our
visitor was a giant with whom he was travelling round the country for
exhibition purposes.

I had never seen a giant before, and he quite frightened me when he
planted himself right beside me on the settle. I rose to find fresh
quarters, not quite so close to such an uncanny monster, but he pulled
me back and sat me on his knee, just as if I had been a four-year-old
child, instead of a good-sized lad of fifteen.

His hands and feet were enormous, and when I shook hands with him at
his request, my decent-sized fist looked like a baby’s in his huge
paw. He was not only tall, but he was large-framed, and well built
in every way; a man of enormous strength, and, as I soon found, of
prodigious appetite. He had, so the showman informed us, just been
captured from the plough in Yorkshire, and the showman was taking him
round, and paying him double as much as he could earn by his work as
an agricultural labourer. The giant liked the nomadic life, and the
princely sum of eighteen shillings a week made him something of a
Crœsus compared with other working men.

Somehow I could not take to the man, although he seemed to show a
great partiality for me; he was rough, coarse of speech, and of a
pugnacious temperament; but, except for one or two little bickerings, a
very pleasant evening was spent, and the showman, who was in his cups,
insisted upon seeing Captain Cooper back to the ship, as the Captain
could not steer straight; in fact, he could scarce make headway at all,
as his legs would cross and keep tripping him up. The end of it was
that the showman’s horse was brought out, the Captain strapped on his
back, and the showman hoisted up behind, to navigate the steed to the
quay. Jim the ostler followed quietly behind on foot, and returned an
hour later with the horse, informing my father that he had left both
skipper and showman fast asleep on the cabin floor.

Then we went to bed, and saw no more of the tipsy showman till ten
o’clock next morning, when he turned up at the “Jolly Waggoner” looking
very seedy.

Well, now having introduced my _dramatis personæ_, I must say a few
words concerning the ship, the lively little _Ladybird_. She was a trim
little oak-built brig of some 200 tons, well found in gear and stores,
and carried beside the skipper, a mate, three hands, and a cook, to
which please add your humble servant as articled apprentice. Our cargo
was a very miscellaneous one, and consisted principally of barreled
beef and pork, cloth, linen, beer, spirits, hardware and cutlery, for
we were bound on a trading expedition to the Faroe Islands, where
we were to take in a cargo of salt-fish, bird-skins, fur, guano,
seal-skins, oil, etc., in exchange for the goods we were taking out, as
very little ready money is in circulation in those out-of-the-way isles.

The skipper did not expect to be gone more than two months, as the
distance from Yarmouth to the Faroes is not more than a thousand miles,
inclusive of touching at the Orkneys and Shetland _en route_; so
when I bade my father farewell on the quay, I anticipated being back
for my birthday on the 10th of June, but my case was only one more
exemplification of the adage, “Man proposes, but God disposes,” as will
be seen.

I was in a great flutter of excitement when the hour of departure
really _did_ arrive, which was not till near noon instead of eight
sharp, as the skipper had announced. I was like a monkey just escaped
from its cage, here, there, and everywhere; and when we dropped down
the river to the harbour’s mouth, on the very last of the ebb, I can
recollect how I scrambled aloft when the order was given to loosen and
hoist sail. I did not know what to do certainly, but I watched the
others, and worked away till my fingers, arms, aye and every limb ached
again--but I was supremely happy until _mal-de-mer_ overtook me, and
then I went below and turned into my berth.

A couple of days found me all alive again, and on deck as merry as a
cricket. We were now off Aberdeen, quietly drawing along under all
sail, and everything going as merry as a marriage bell.

As night began to close in around us we had Peterhead (the chief
whaling port) right on our port beam, and that gave Captain Cooper an
opportunity to tell some of his yarns about the whaling cruises he had
participated in when a young man in the Greenland seas.

After dark, being past Kinnard’s Head, near Frazerburgh, we had the
great gulf between Aberdeenshire and Caithness on our port beam, and
were quite out of sight of land. The wind, which had been lazy all the
day, now began to freshen and back a little to the south of west,
which was very favourable for our sailing. Seeing this the captain
made up his mind not to call in at Kirkwall, the chief town in the
Orkneys, but to leave it for the homeward voyage, and take advantage
of the favouring breeze to push on to Lerwick in the Shetland Isles.
His orders before turning in were consequently given to the mate to be
carried out, unless a change of wind should occur, in which case the
skipper was to be called.

Having got over my sea-sickness and found my sea-legs, the day appeared
too short for me, so I agreed with the cabin-boy, Joey Nicholls, that
we would not turn in till the end of the first watch (midnight), but
stay on deck and enjoy the beautiful evening, for it was a lovely mild
moonlight night. My own watch was the second dog-watch, which is over
at eight p.m., so Joey and I had laid ourselves out for a further four
hours’ fun before turning in.

For a long time we chatted with old Bunks, whose turn at the wheel it
was, and then getting tired of him, we took off our shoes and skylarked
about in the beautiful moonlight. We set each other various tricks
to perform, at which we found we were about equal; but presently
Joey, whose turn it was to set the next task, ascended to the mizzen
cross-trees, and sat there for two or three minutes, when he came down
and dared me to do the same feat. It was a simple task enough, but it
must be remembered I had only had two or three days on the sea, and had
hardly overcome my nervousness in going aloft even in the daytime, and
to ascend at night when the moon throws such black shadows from the
sails, was quite trial enough for me.

However, I essayed it, and arrived safely at the cross-trees, upon
which I perched myself in a very gingerly manner, for fear (in my
ignorance) that my weight might cause them to break. I sat and looked
upon the heaving waters around, and was endeavouring to summon courage
to look on deck from my dizzy height, when I heard a thud and a cry of
pain below me, and involuntarily glancing down, I saw the mate strike
Bunks, who was hanging to the spokes of the wheel. As I looked another
blow descended, and then breaking the unfortunate man’s hold from the
spokes, I saw the mate deliberately pitch him over the taffrail into
the white wake of the _Ladybird_, where he seemed to float a minute and
then disappear.

Almost simultaneously I saw a strange man seize poor Joey, struggle
with him to the bulwarks and throw him overboard. Joey could swim, and
I could hear his shrieks for several minutes, as he vainly struck out
after the brig, which was making three feet to his one.

I could not recognize the assailant of my poor chum; but when I looked
under the foot of one of the sails, I beheld, to my horror, the
herculean form of the giant I had left a few days before at my father’s
inn, the “Jolly Waggoner.” I could scarcely believe my eyes, but a form
like the one beneath me on the deck was such as one sees scarcely in a
lifetime, and when once seen cannot readily be forgotten.

My heart beat quickly, and I trembled so violently that I could with
difficulty retain my hold of the ropes to prevent myself from falling
to the deck. I could not keep my eyes off the figures beneath me, and
in the bright moonlight could detect their every movement. I saw the
showman go to the wheel and pull his coat-collar up and his cap-peak
down, and the giant hide himself behind the cook’s galley, which stood
amidships.

Then the mate went to the fo’castle scuttle and bawled out, “All hands
tumble up, man overboard; shorten sail--be alive there--don’t stop to
shave,” and the usual patter for suddenly turning up a crew, and in a
twinkling up came the three men from their berths, rubbing the sleep
out of their eyes with their knuckles.

“Here, lads,” said the mate, pointing to the boat which was hanging
from the davits, “jump in and lower away. Old Bunks is in the water
astern. Look alive now!”

They stepped up to the boat and began to right side her, when out
from his lurking-place behind the galley sprang the giant, and in a
trice, with a heavy cudgel, he knocked the three poor fellows down like
ninepins, and before they could recover, picked them up one by one like
bags of chaff, and tossed them over the bulwarks into the silent sea.

At this sight my senses nearly forsook me; but clasping the mizzen
top-mast convulsively I hung on, cogitating what to do, and deciding
that if either of the three fiends below should attempt to ascend the
shrouds to take me, I would save them the commission of another murder
by precipitating myself on the hard deck below, thus hoping to kill
myself instantaneously.

They descended into the fo’castle, looked into the cook’s galley and
under the boat to try and discover me, and I heard them mention my name
several times, coupled with most awful threats and voluble profanity.
They did not appear to think of looking aloft for me; but as I pressed
my body to the mast I was afraid, so great was my agitation, and
knowing wood to be such a splendid conductor of sound, that they might
hear the violent throbbing of my heart as they passed the foot of the
mast. It was a foolish idea, but at the time I quite believed it beat
with noise enough to betray me.

After another search the mate, with an oath, exclaimed, “Leave the
---- till the morning; we can scrag him then just as well as now. Come
below, lads, and have a drink, for I think we’ve finished our job in a
very neat fashion!”

They all went down into the little cabin, which contained two berths,
one for the captain and the other for the dastardly mate. The
skylight being a little open I could hear them talking, but could not
distinguish what they said; and I could also hear the clinking of
glasses and the drawing of corks.

But what of Captain Cooper? So far I had neither heard nor seen him.
Was he dead, or what had become of him?

I had no means of ascertaining.

How long I sat on the cross-trees I could not say, but presently the
voices in the cabin grew less noisy, and at length ceased altogether.
Whereupon I imagined that the ruffians had drunk so much that they had
fallen asleep. I listened for some time longer, and at length, as all
was quiet, and I was getting numb with sitting so long in one position,
I quietly quitted my eyrie, and with trembling steps descended to the
deck, and peeped through the small aperture left for ventilation at
the edge of the cabin skylight. Although I could hear voices I could
perceive no one in the cabin; however, I noticed one thing which
surprised me--that a small trap-door in the cabin floor stood slightly
raised, and from the space beneath came rays of light, showing that
the conspirators were doing something in the hold. Now I thought, if I
could only steal down the companion, I could not only look round the
cabin for some signs of the captain, but I might also get a glimpse
beneath the trap-door and see what was going on below. I doubted my
courage, but not for long, as it occurred to me that the captain, after
all, might not be dead; and in the fact of his being still alive laid
my only chance of escape.

I felt my way cautiously down the dark stairway, and peered down the
partly-open trap-door. I could see the three villains on their knees
sorting over papers, which might have been one-pound bank-notes by
their size, and the care with which they were being counted out. In
front of the giant stood a large leathern bag, with its mouth wide
open, displaying bright golden guineas in great numbers; evidently
the gang were dividing the spoil. The place in which they were now
gloating over their crime-bought wealth appeared to be only about six
feet square, and to contain nothing but some large iron-bound chests,
the contents of which I could not even guess at, but I should say that
the place had been used as a kind of strong-room, and the only mode of
ingress and egress was evidently the trap-door through which I was now
looking.

But what of the captain?

Carefully, in the total darkness, I felt my way to his bunk, and put
my hand in. Yes, he was there, for I touched him. It was his leg I
touched. I slid my hand up towards his head, and my fingers rested upon
his cheek. It was warm, but, alas! there was a feeling about the flesh
that told me he was dead!

At the awful discovery I could scarcely repress a wild, hysterical
shriek--a shriek which would have cost me my life, for the assassins
below would instantly have sprung up and murdered me with as little
compunction as they would kill a fowl or a rabbit.

I clutched the side of the bunk for support; I could scarcely breathe!
I staggered; and stumbling, kicked against something which fell and
sounded like a knife. It made a noise on the cabin floor, and I heard
a voice say with an oath, “What’s that?” Then I saw the light move and
the shadows of the men sway about.

They were coming up into the cabin! I was lost!!

Stay; was there not time to reach the companion and fly on deck?

No.

My faintness vanished instantly, being put to flight by the new and
greater horror which presented itself. The discovery of the captain’s
death had unhinged me, but the approach of my own death braced my
nerves and spurred my limbs into immediate action; for without an
instant’s hesitation I sprang into the dead man’s berth and hid behind
the corpse, placing myself between the dead skipper and the side of
the vessel. The head and shoulders of the giant came upward through
the trap, but it was too dark for him to discern anything. Oh, for a
pistol! I could then have defied the villains, who would have been
caught like rats in a trap of their own setting.

The head suddenly disappeared, but presently made its reappearance, and
the lantern was handed from below and stood on the cabin floor, while I
in my hiding-place quaked with fear, imagining that I should now for a
certainty be discovered and slaughtered.

Here was a contrast to the cosy bar-parlour of the “Jolly Waggoner”;
but I could give but little thought even to my dear old dad, knowing
that my life hung on a mere thread. My eyes were riveted on the
gigantic head and shoulders emerging from the floor. The lantern came
first through the trap, and was swung aloft by the brawny arm of the
giant, who looked around beneath it. He gazed steadfastly at the face
of the dead man by my side to see if any movement was apparent. The
dead man hid and saved me, for the giant quietly pronounced one word,
“Rats!” and then he and the lantern vanished below again.

Here was a dilemma for me to be in! What should I do?

To lie where I was simply meant being discovered in a very short time.
What _could_ I do?

If I attempted to get in the boat and lower myself down from the davits
I should be heard. Could I feel for the knife on the floor and stab the
rascals one by one as they ascended the ladder into the cabin?

Bah! my very heart recoiled at the notion. I could not have killed them
even to save my own life. I thought of the sensation of feeling the
knife drive through the flesh and jar upon the bones, and the spurt of
warm life-blood over my hand, and I shuddered at the idea. No, I was no
coward, but as a lad of fifteen I could not take a human life, even for
the sake of saving my own. With a pistol it might have been different,
a touch of the trigger and all would have been over; but to stab and
stab again--no, I could not do it.

But stay, a bright idea struck me. Surely the trap-door had a bolt or
bolts!

Out of the berth I immediately crept, over the silent form of the man
who in death had saved my life, and stole on tiptoe to the trap-door.
The villains below were jangling over the doling, and their noisy
altercation served to hide any little noise I made searching my way
across the cabin, which was in utter darkness.

Joy! there were two bolts!

I carefully felt the bolts to ascertain if they worked easily, and with
my fingers examined the staples to see if they were clear and strong.

Yes, both were clear and in order. Then noiselessly and tremblingly I
lowered the lid and shot the bolts, and so expeditiously and quietly
was it done that had there been even less noise below, it is probable
that the men would scarcely have known the moment of their trapping,
though they would soon perceive the fact from the air becoming hot and
vitiated.

Groping about I soon found the knife on the cabin floor, and sprang on
deck, noticing that the night had grown much darker, and sombre clouds
hid the moon; still there was plenty of light for me to see to lower
the boat. But now another fact arrested my attention, a startling fact:
there was smoke quietly curling up from the fo’castle. I rushed to
the hatch, but, looking down, could see nothing for the dense smoke;
on listening intently, however, I heard a faint crackling sound as of
burning wood.

_The ship was on fire!_

Should I release the prisoners?

No, that would never do, my life would be forfeited to my humanity
without a doubt. Probably they would break out of the strong-room long
before the fire reached so far aft, and although I had the only boat,
they would probably have sufficient time to rig up some kind of raft,
upon which they could remain safely till they were picked up and taken
into port by a passing trading vessel.

I could imagine them being hanged at Newgate on my evidence!

Keeping my eyes on the companion way, I popped into the galley, and
fished a huge junk of salt beef out of the boiler in which I had seen
the cook place it the night before, for the purpose of soaking it to
remove some of the super-abundant salt with which it was saturated. A
bucket of doubtfully clean water stood in a corner; I tasted it, and
found it was fresh, poured it into a large stone bottle, spilling half
of it in my hurry, rammed a dirty cloth into the neck by way of cork,
and put bottle and beef into the boat.

I hastened to lower the jolly-boat from the davits, but before she
touched the water one of the falls jammed, the forward one luckily,
and, as I lowered away on the aft one, the stern rested in the water,
while the bows remained a couple of feet above it, in a dangerous
position. This is not at all an uncommon occurrence, but my nerves were
so shaken by the terrible ordeal I had passed through, that I fancied
I heard the noise of feet on deck, so seizing my knife I cut away
like a madman, making a dozen random cuts where one well-directed one
would have sufficed. The boat swung round before I could unhook the
other fall, and I was within an ace of meeting a watery grave when she
righted, and bumped against the brig’s black side.

From the taffrail, as I swept past, depended a thin line, which I
mechanically clutched and held, but as the ship was going some three
knots an hour the boat rapidly dropped astern. I still held on as
fathom after fathom paid out over the taffrail, till quite twenty
fathoms hung in the water; then came a jerk, which threw me on my face,
but I still hung on, and made the end fast round the forward thwart, as
the other end was evidently fast on the _Ladybird_.

I sat in the bows for what seemed like hours, knife in hand, ready to
cut myself adrift on the first signs of a human being appearing on
deck. I saw the moon set and the night grow inky dark, and the volume
of smoke from the fo’castle increase, and then I saw the glow of the
extending fire reflected on the sails, but no human form was visible.
Then I heard a crash and a subdued roar, and saw tongues of flame
shoot up above the deck, catching the foresail and setting it in a
blaze; then up and up it mounted till the whole suite of sails on the
foremast were ablaze, and as I sat there I remember thinking to myself
how pretty it looked. I felt secure, and my nerves were soothed by the
sight before me, and I looked on calmly from my seat in the bows at the
gallant ship, which from being my home had nearly become my tomb. Could
I but have looked at the men in the strong-room, then, come what might,
I am afraid I must have released them, for evidently they were still
prisoners, and my sympathetic heart would have been my body’s ruin.
I tried to find some mode for their release and my own safety, but
although I racked my brain, I could devise no practical plan; beside,
by this time they were probably suffocated.

While thus cogitating, the flames took hold upon the sails of the
mizzen-mast, and they too were soon destroyed, leaving the yards and
masts blazing. The air grew hotter and hotter; the deck was in a
blaze, and great pieces of burning wood and tarry rope began to fall in
and around the boat, and although I wished to hang on to witness the
last of the _Ladybird_, I was at last compelled to cut the rope and
drop quietly astern, as the heat, smoke, and fiery drift had become
quite unbearable.

The good ship was now alight from stem to stern, and without her sails
made very little progress through the water, but drifted gradually
before the faint breeze, so slowly, in fact, that with the paddles I
could manage to keep up with her. She presented a splendid appearance
as, clothed in fire, she rose and fell on the roll of the sea; her
reflection, mirrored in the waves, made the water glow with an
incandescent lustre that riveted my boyish attention as intently as the
finest pyrotechnic display could possibly have done.

Day at last began to dawn, and when light fairly broke, I was alone
on the ocean; for the poor old hull with its stumpy black masts
swerved from side to side, and, with a sidelong movement, sank like a
tea-saucer, sending up, with a sudden puff, a great cloud of vapour,
and leaving many charred fragments floating in the swirling waters
where she disappeared. I pulled in all directions, to see if perchance
the bodies of any of the villainous trio might float to the surface,
but nothing met my eyes but broken and burnt wood, and the usual
flotsam from a scuttled vessel.

And that was the last I ever saw of the good ship _Ladybird_.

Now that should really be the end of my yarn, for I am not going to
tell you how I drifted about for three days, wet to the skin, and
unable to protect myself from the pouring rain; and I need not tell
you how I cut my raw salt beef in strips and washed it down with the
dirty water I had in the bottle. Suffice it to say that on the evening
of the third day I was picked up, more dead than alive, by a brig bound
to Rekiavick, in Iceland; and from thence was given a passage to Hull,
from which port I walked home to Yarmouth.

When I quietly entered the bar of the “Jolly Waggoner,” I nearly
frightened my father out of his senses at my unexpected appearance.

But to tell of that would make my yarn too long.

What I want to wind up with is the proof of its truth; and this is how
I vouch for its accuracy, by quoting the following extract, taken from
the columns of the _Daily Telegraph_ (London).

Look up that newspaper for Monday, January 15th, 1894, and on page 3,
near the bottom of the 6th column, you will find this paragraph:--

“A STRANGE DISCOVERY.--A Plymouth correspondent telegraphs that advices
have been received of the arrival in Galveston of the Norwegian barque
_Elsa Anderson_, having in tow the hull of an English-built brig, which
had apparently been burned at sea more than fifty years ago, and which
appeared on the surface of the ocean after a submarine disturbance
off the Faroe Islands. The hull of the strange derelict was covered
with sea-shells, but the hold and under decks contained very little
water. In the captain’s cabin were found several iron-bound chests, the
contents of which had been reduced to pulp except a leather bag, which
required an axe to open it. In it were guineas bearing date 1809, and
worth over £1000. There were also several watches and a stomacher of
pearls blackened and rendered valueless by the action of the water.
Three skeletons were also found, one of a man about seven feet high.”

There, that is my yarn, and I may just add that my first experience of
the sea was my last, for my maiden voyage contained enough excitement
during its very brief duration to last for the term of my natural life.

“What do you ask? How came the pearl stomacher and the watches in the
hands of the miscreants?”

Well, that I must leave, for I did not see them in their possession,
but doubtless they were the proceeds of robberies ashore.




IV.

INTRODUCTION TO “A VISITOR FROM MARS.”


The narrator of the following quaint story was a little man, very
soberly dressed, and very timid in his demeanour. He appeared to be
greatly in awe of his wife, of whom he spoke with due, or perhaps
I might say undue, humility and deference. If his habiliments were
sober, I am much afraid his habits were the reverse; his nose was very
rubicund, and its bright colouring contrasted oddly with his coat, once
black, but now tinged with a disreputable greenish hue.

He sat in an awkward position on the very edge of the seat, acquiesced
in everything I said, and was of such a feeble, backboneless character,
that after he had consumed half a tumbler of whiskey at a gulp, I had
no trouble in hypnotizing him (without even asking his consent) as he
lolled back on the chair in a very drowsy condition.

Slight hope was mine of eliciting anything like a story from this
intemperate little gentleman, and it was an agreeable surprise,
therefore, when he reeled off the following, which I will call “A
Visitor from Mars.”


A VISITOR FROM MARS.

That a spirit could visit this earth from such a distant planet as
Mars, my wife would not believe for a moment, explain it how I would.

She required a proof, and proof I could have given her had she only
attended to her household duties and kept my pockets in proper repair,
instead of prying into things that did not concern her; beside, was
not the verbal description of my shadowy visitor and his extraordinary
conversation sufficient to convince any one but an obstinate woman that
what I spoke was solid truth?

Why should she imagine that the inordinately hot weather of the past
summer had had such a soporific effect upon me, that, in wooing
Morpheus, I simply _dreamed_ of my visitor?

Why should she think that because I had my spirit flask with me during
my afternoon ramble that I----?--but allow me, my intelligent reader,
to lay my story before _you_, and I think you will bear me out that
there is a foundation in it.

To begin at the beginning.

It was a hot, dreamy day in the middle of August, and I was staying at
the old-fashioned, out-of-the-world, under-the-hill town of Minehead in
Somersetshire. The atmosphere being too hot for sitting indoors, and
the water much too clear for fishing, I thought I would take a stroll
to Horner Woods, which lie under the great hills, just this side of
Stoke Pero, and in the immediate neighbourhood of Dunkery Beacon, which
is precisely one-third of a mile high.

Opening my umbrella and using it as a sunshade, I wandered listlessly
along the two or three miles which intervene between Minehead and my
haunt, and took a long time in reaching the recumbent tree upon which
I loved to sit and sketch or read. A more charming or solitary spot
cannot be found in all the West Country.

The walk leads up a narrow valley, skirted on either side by hills
rising abruptly to a height of many hundred feet, culminating in the
giant Dunkery Beacon, whose bald head, as I have said, breaks the
horizon seventeen hundred feet above sea level. The feet of these giant
hills are clad in trees and underwood of such an impenetrable nature,
that as one walks in the valley and looks up the acclivities, one
can see but a few score yards, and then the mass of wood and foliage
becomes so black and dense that the eye cannot penetrate it.

Of course, as in all western valleys, a bubbling, murmuring trout
stream flows through it towards the sea, into which it falls at the
pretty village of Porlock, some miles distant; and as it twists and
falls from and among the great boulders with which the bed of the
stream is thickly strewn, it is easy to fancy one hears persons
conversing at no great distance, so peculiar is the murmuring noise
of the waters. Perhaps the water has its familiar spirits! Why not?
We know that spirits and water are frequently very intimate with each
other, and produce much talk and idle chatter, and possibly they are
spirit voices that we hear, although we cannot make much sense of them.

It was a fairy spot I had selected, and as I sat on my comfortable seat
on the mossy old fallen monarch of the woods, with my back resting
comfortably against a bough, which gave it the support of an arm-chair,
I could not help imagining that such a spot would just have suited
Robin Hood and his merry men. In fact, I amused myself by peopling the
glade in my imagination.

There--under that great branching oak might rest several mighty casks
of ale, round which the men in Lincoln green would cluster, lying in
various picturesque attitudes, with their bows and arrows hanging
from the branches of surrounding trees, ready to be snatched down
at a moment’s notice in case of any alarm. There--where that patch
of yellow-green grass crept out from the withered oak, I would have
a party of dancers tripping it to pipe and tabour; and down yonder
precipitous path should come the lofty Little John, with a fine deer
across his broad shoulders; while in the arbour formed by those three
hawthorn trees, I could imagine the sturdy form and graceful figure of
Robin himself and the fair Maid Marian. Then Friar Tuck must be among
them; yes, he should have a large horn of ale and----thud!!

“Why, where in the name of fortune came you from?” I cried, as a little
fat man in cassock and hood plumped down on the soft turf beside me.
“Have I the pleasure of addressing his reverence, Friar Tuck?”

“Friar Tuck! No, my friend--never heard of that gentleman. _My_ name is
Friar Bacon.”

“Friar Bacon!” I exclaimed. “Why, surely _you_ never had anything to do
with this jovial company--Robin Hood and his merry men?”

[Illustration: “Just place your hand upon my breast.”--_p. 91._]

But as I swept my arm round to give emphasis to my speech, I perceived,
to my astonishment, that nought but trees and rocks met my view on
every side, my foresters had vanished, and I found myself in the
presence of a short, stout, rubicund monk, who should have been dust
these six hundred years.

“Bacon,” I murmured, looking doubtingly at my visitor; “why, how is it
possible that you, who died, if my memory serves me rightly, ere the
close of the thirteenth century, can be here before me at the end of
the nineteenth? You are joking with me, my friend.”

“Oh no,” replied my visitor, “it is extremely simple. You must know
that I, with many other learned men, have formed a scientific colony,
so to speak, in the planet Mars. We have many among us known to you by
repute. St. Dunstan, Newton, Archimedes, Leonardo da Vinci, Galileo,
Euclid, and many others, are of our company, and right harmoniously we
live together. Live, I say, but of course you will understand I mean
exist, for we have for many ages passed from the flesh, and are now
simply etherealized bodies, or, if you will, spirits!

“You would ask how came we in Mars?

“Well, let it suffice if I inform you, that by the sanction of the
Great Spirit, we, Advancers of Mankind, are allowed a special parole,
as a recompense for our toil on earth, and there in Mars we exist,
instead of perambulating this dense earth of yours, in a spirit form,
till we are required ‘At the Last.’

“Just place your hand upon my breast.”

I did so, but my fingers meeting no resistance, I extended my arm, and
could see my hand emerge beyond the figure as the jolly friar remarked:

“There, you see, I am pure spirit, double distilled, and I trust highly
rectified.

“Well,” he continued, “I have not long to stay, so I will have a short
chat with you, and then, heigh presto! back to my cosy planet. You see
it is only once in two years we get very close to your earth, that is,
at a certain time we are only 35 millions of miles from you, whilst at
another time we are as much as 244 millions of miles away. Therefore
as we travel fast I must not linger long, or I shall be late at our
monthly scientific meeting, which takes place to-morrow.”

I could not refrain from asking him what the planet Mars was like, and
he very civilly informed me that it was prettier than the earth, and
its climate milder; “beside which,” said he--

“The genial seasons are longer; we have a spring of 192 days, and a
summer of 180; whilst the autumn is of 150, and the winter of 147 days’
duration only. A longish year, as you will observe, nearly 690 days;
but then we are so busy and so happy that we do not notice the flight
of time. Time is an object to you mortals, but we philosophers totally
disregard it. If you visited our planet you would find one thing in
particular very trying to you in your present gross form--we have no
atmosphere to speak of.

“We neither eat, drink, nor sleep; require no clothing, that is no
_renewal_ of clothing, for this cassock is the shade of the last
costume I wore when on earth, and will probably last me till the Crack
of Doom; consequently we are enabled to employ the whole of our time in
scientific research.”

“Might I venture to inquire into the nature of your scientific
studies?” I timidly inquired.

“Why certainly,” he replied, rubbing his forehead reflectively; and as
he drew his hand across the noble expanse of his frontal bone, I could
see a rush of little sparks follow his shadowy fingers. This set me
to gaze more intently at his phenomenal person, and as I did so I was
surprised to find that I could see quite through what should have been
the frontal bone, and there, in the cavity of the cranium, I beheld his
brain at work thinking. It simply appeared like revolving smoke curling
this way and that, and taking fantastic forms; halting, and then moving
on again in complex but orderly movement.

Seeing my utter astonishment, he good-naturedly enlightened me as to
the strange appearance.

“The brain,” said he, “is _the man_, it never dies, and in our case
is the only part which does not entirely become spirit, that is,
_transparent_ spirit. It always remains a foggy, cloudy kind of ether,
visible to mortals; and they are constantly walking through and sitting
surrounded by it, though they know it not.

“You probably do not believe in ghosts or spirits, yet you are
surrounded by them day and night, and when, by a variety of accidental
causes, one becomes materialized you see it, and immediately write off
to a newspaper about it as something wonderful. Ha! ha! If I could
only open your eyes and show you the number of ghosts in this silent
and solitary spot you would scarcely believe your eyes; there are
thousands!”

Then looking at me with his peculiar, luminous eyes he inquired, “Did
you ever notice a kind of mist floating over graveyards during certain
days of damp, muggy weather?”

“Yes,” I replied, “often; but what of that?”

“What of that!--why,” continued Bacon, “that is the spirit, the soul,
_the brain_ of disembodied mortals, which floats till the Final Day
just above the ground, the rock, the sea, or wherever the body was
buried.”

I marvelled at this, whereupon my communicative friend went further,
and said:--

“Do you not know that these spirits may be conversed with by mortals?
You have a certain control over electricity, you have the phonograph,
the electrophone, and the telephone--trifles in comparison to what we
have invented in Mars--but with these you have only to proceed in this
way. You simply----”

But ere he uttered another word a wind swept through the wood with a
crackling sound, at which the Friar bowed his head and quietly uttered
the words “I obey!” It was evident by his uneasy movements and facial
expression that he had been stayed from enlightening me further by some
unseen spirits, so, to turn the subject, I said:--

“What is there appertaining to this earth in which we might advance our
knowledge, by invention or otherwise?”

The little monk looked at me with a mirthful face, putting his jolly
head on one side, and with a look in his eyes as if he would say,
“Don’t you wish you may pump me?” said:--

“I must tell you plainly, that by our bond we are forbidden to tell
to mortals the secrets we possess, but I will just give you a little
idea or two that you may experimentalize upon, and see what you are
clever enough to make of notions that _we_ have already established as
practical scientific facts.

“Electricity with you is only in its infancy, it is but just born--yet
you have taken several steps in the right direction; you have the
phonograph, the electrophone, and the telephone, all of which are
very well in their way, but you must go further with them. If you are
clever enough you can make the phonograph convey _thought_ as well as
speech, so that you and I, being a mile apart, could, with the help
of an improved phonograph, convey our _thoughts_ to each other. With
a certain instrument conversation with departed spirits might be held
and the very secrets of the grave revealed, and the great----” But here
the wind again sighed through the valley, and the monk again bowed and
meekly crossed himself, having evidently ventured too far beyond the
bounds of his suggestions.

“The electrophone,” said he, “may easily be improved, so that in
combination with a certain machine which I may tell you is _on the eve
of being invented_ in America, will not only give you the voice of the
person speaking at a distance, but also his or her likeness with every
line of the features expressing the individuality of the person under
notice.

“Electricians of the Nineteenth Century! why, you have only reached
‘A’ in the alphabet of electrical possibilities. How absurd of you to
use horseflesh to draw loads, and raise or lower heavy masses, and to
use steam--noisy, bulky steam--for locomotives and marine engines, and
to write with ink and even use hand-power to sew with, when everything
could be done quicker, easier, cheaper, and cleaner by the _touchstone
of all future motion_--electricity!

“There, get along, ye mortals of to-day!” and the little man rolled
about with laughter, “ye laggards, why, if half-a-dozen of our company
in Mars had had _your_ scientific instruments and delicate machinery
in _our_ day we should have made an entirely different world of this
earth. Why, my old friend Archimedes would have obtained a fulcrum
for his lever long before now, and if no one had prevented him would
have attempted to hurl the earth right out of the planetary system
into space. Oh, he is even now a most mischievous fellow, though you
would not think it to look at him; his ambition is boundless, and his
scientific pranks are at times very reprehensible. Only last week,
just for the fun of the thing, he blew Sir Isaac Newton nearly to the
sun, and when the poor fellow returned to Mars after several days’
absence we scarcely knew him, he had become so sunburnt with his visit
to the suburbs of the great luminary. It was beyond a joke, you know.”
Then the little man went off into another paroxysm of laughter at the
thought of poor Sir Isaac’s burnt spirit-face.

“What,” queried I, “can you tell me of ships and navigation? Have we
reached the limit of speed in the merchant service, and the zenith of
offensive and defensive power in the Navy?”

These questions sent the little man off into a fresh fit of laughter,
and he looked at me as much as to say, “You ignoramus, you type of
mortal feebleness and conceit.” Presently having calmed down he
proceeded:--

“I must tell you that Nelson is with us in spirit, and has turned out
a capital inventor. He follows eagerly all that takes place, navally,
in the little dots on the globe called Great Britain, and you will
scarcely believe it when I tell you, that he has invented a _wooden_
ship that would in one brief hour destroy your entire navy.”

“How could it be done?” said I.

“Ah! there you are! I cannot _tell_ you, I can only give you an idea.
My lord’s ship is of wood, compressed india-rubber, and cork! The only
thing you have to discover is how to place your caoutchouc so that when
a shot is fired at your ship it passes clean through it and the hole
immediately closes, just as the water closes after it is cloven by the
ship’s hull. Firing at Nelson’s ship would have the same effect as if
you thrust your walking-stick through me or through your own shadow.”

“But,” I asked eagerly, “how would he destroy our navy in an hour?”

“Why,” said the Friar, “he and Sir Humphrey Davy have invented an
explosive of such vast power, that a single pound weight would destroy
the strongest ironclad afloat, and he can fire it from an ordinary
shoulder gun, with which he delights to practise at the mountains of
Mars. He can chip a thousand-ton mountain top off with a single shot;
we have to stop him at it, for he quite spoils the scenery, and alters
it so completely that we are in danger of losing ourselves. He calls
his destructive agent ‘infernite,’ and it really is quite diabolical.”

“And of speed in merchant vessels,” I remarked, “what of that?”

“There you are all wrong again, you have gone right off the proper
path. Why, your passenger vessels actually float on the _surface_ of
the sea, instead of fathoms below it; consequently you have both wind
and waves to contend with, which is absurdly and palpably wrong to any
one who gives the least reflection to the matter.

“Set your inventive faculties to work, control and compress your
air--by the way, see that you get it pure, sea air is always best and
safest--sink your hermetically-sealed ship by hydraulic arrangements,
pitch your great thumping steam monsters overboard, and propel your
vessel with civilized and cleanly electric force, and there you are!
America in twenty-four hours! India in three days! China in five! and
Australia in a week!!

“This speed should have been attained years since; but your engineers
are so in love with great smoky furnaces, steel monsters, and grimy
coal and grease, that it will take some time before they get off with
the ugly old love (steam) and on with the elegant new one (electric
force).”

I nodded approval, and put another query. “Can we do anything more to
improve the locomotive engine both as to safety and speed? Of course
I gather from what you have just said that electricity could be made
to take the place of steam, and then we should get a much quicker and
safer service of trains than at present.”

“Quicker service of trains?” he echoed, and looked at me in feigned
amazement. “Trains and locomotives, did you say? Why, my dear friend,
you astonish me. To improve your service, gather up all your network
of iron rails, but leave your stations intact for the present, and
pitch both the rails and the horrid shrieking engines into the midst
of the Atlantic, not into the North Sea, for that is so shallow that
the immense pile of old iron would cause an obstruction to submarine
navigation, and quite spoil the fishing-ground, though it would be an
excellent iron tonic to the fish.

“Then, having done that, invent a neat little electric aërostat--it
can and has been done by us--and simply fly from point to point,
from station to station if you will, noiselessly and expeditiously.
Edinburgh or Dublin in three hours, or St. Petersburg in ten, would be
a fair speed. What are they made of, do you say? Well, there is that
bothering bond that seals my lips, or I would willingly make a sketch
and give you a specification with pleasure.

“You know that certain chemicals produce certain gases. Gas is a power:
it may be converted into a motive power. Do you follow?”

I bowed.

“For the fabric: do you know that six goose quills will support a
man?--if not, I can assure you they will; there is lightness and
strength for you! What can, with equal economy, be beaten thinner or is
lighter than aluminium?--a new metal with you, I find. For propelling
mechanism, study the wing of the swift-flying birds, created by our
Great Spirit; you cannot _improve_ on that, but you can modify and
adapt it to your particular purpose.”

Then casting his eye upon my umbrella, which was lying open beside me
(for I had used it to keep the sun off), he bade me observe its form,
which I did.

“In that worm-produced fabric,” said he, pointing to the silk shade,
“you have the form of the best sustainer (parachute) that even we have
yet discovered. There! I have mentioned your principal materials, now
set to work, and do not longer disfigure your beautiful islands with
iron webs, rabbit burrows, and crawling beetles, for such, I am told,
your railway systems appear to the inhabitants of your satellite the
Moon, who have very powerful telescopes, and are fond of gazing at
their big brother the Earth.

“Really, when I come to reflect upon the condition of you mortals, your
whole system seems strange; here, six centuries after I have left the
earth, you are actually eating and drinking just as when I was among
you (and I was no mean connoisseur of a bottle of Sack or Malmsey),
and, consequently, you are always ill and ailing. It therefore follows,
as a matter of course, that half of you die before there is any
necessity for you to do so.

“For the first thousand or two years after the Creation, people knew
what was good for them, and partook of everything fresh and good, and
lived for centuries; but now it appears to me that you have a system in
vogue among you called adulteration, by which one half of the community
seeks to partially poison the other half, simply to gather together as
many pieces of gold as they can hoard in a few years, and when they die
they leave these gold coins to some one else to scatter to the four
winds and the Evil One, for their so-called amusement. All very nice,
I dare say, but why do you not do as I did--work, and discover the
Philosopher’s Stone and Elixir Vitæ! Then, having discovered them, you
could be as rich as you pleased, and live as long as you had any desire
to.”

“Interrupting you,” I ventured, “would it be against your bond to
impart to me, a mortal, the secret of those two great discoveries you
claim to have made when on earth? Would you be induced by anything I
could offer you, or do for you, to divulge the component parts of your
Elixir Vitæ?”

The jolly little man laughed till his sides vibrated like a
blanc-mange, at the very idea of _my_ being able to do anything
for _him_, or offer him any equivalent for his priceless secret of
continued life.

“Ha! ha! Ho! ho! My friend, you would be the death of me if it were
possible to kill a spirit; I declare I feel quite a curious feeling
just where my ribs ought to be, by indulging in such hearty laughter as
I have not experienced for quite a century.

“My friend, I will give you the recipe for the Elixir of Life with
pleasure, as it was my own discovery _previous_ to my death, so that
I may divulge it to any one I choose. The ingredients are so simple
that it is a wonder scores of alchemists did not discover it as I did,
but doubtless it was the simplicity of the various items that caused
them to miss the mark. They searched for curious and complex mixtures,
for crystals and ores, powders and nostrums, distillations and subtle
gases, and other things of a complex nature, when the real articles
were right under their very noses, and _in everyday use_!

“Here is the solution to the buried secret; for buried it was when they
laid me in the grave six centuries agone, for I told it to no man, nor
did I take advantage of it to prolong my own life, as I had worked so
hard that I longed for a thorough rest, and am now enjoying it, for we
spirits never tire.

“Take one ounce of acetic acid, it is a preventive of frivolity; one
pound of pure alcohol, which gives spirit and vigour whenever used;
of laudanum three drams, as a soporific giving a quiet and steady
demeanour; and add two drams of ground cloves, for spice is very
preserving to the body.

“Next you add three pints of distilled water, which is a very cleansing
agent, and with it put in a few twigs of birch, which is a capital
corrective, and every man requires somewhat of the kind at times.

“Then you take a few--but I am sure you will forget all these things,
so, if you will lend me a piece of paper and a pencil (which are things
we lacked in our day), I will write down the various ingredients and
quantities for you, and you can get them made up at any chemist’s; here
are twenty-seven ingredients in all, each good for something; miss
one, and you spoil the harmony of the whole, and the prescription is
useless. Everything must be absolutely free from adulteration, or only
a partial success will be the result.”

Then for a quarter of an hour he scribbled away, occasionally pausing,
and cocking his head upon one side to recollect things which he had
stored in his busy memory centuries ago.

His smoky brain revolved at a great rate as I watched him write the
formula.

“There,” said he at last, as he handed me the wonderful secret, which
was to make me live to see ships float under water, people fly through
the air, and electricity the great motive power of the world, “I think
you will find that correct, and I shall be glad to meet you here this
day one hundred years hence, to see how matters are going with you. By
the way, what is the time?”

I now perceived that it was grown quite dark, and the stars were
twinkling through the trees, a fact which I had not before noted, so
absorbed had I been with the strange conversation of my visitor.

I looked at my watch.

“It is five minutes past ten o’clock,” I said.

“Goodness me!” said the friar; “how I shall have to hurry. I should
have left at seven o’clock, as I am due at Mars not later than
midnight, or I forfeit my liberty for one generation; and thirty years
without a fly to some planet or other is no joke. Ta, ta!”

And as I looked at my jolly friend he scared me by suddenly becoming
perfectly incandescent; he glowed for an instant like a furnace at
white heat, then with a whizz and a flash he was gone so quickly that
the eye could only follow him for a trice, and then he disappeared
into space; at least his bodily form disappeared by apparently
transforming itself into a star, which grew smaller and less brilliant,
till it was entirely lost amid the myriads of others which studded the
sky.

I smelt for brimstone, but there was not even a sign of it that I could
detect.

I felt dizzy, and stiff, and stupid, but gathering my umbrella, books,
and flask together (the latter quite empty, by the by, possibly upset),
I made for Minehead, but found it a long and difficult walk. Sitting so
long in one position had cramped and affected my legs to such a degree,
that it was with much meandering and uncertainty that I reached my
apartments near the little pier.

My wife, good soul, was waiting up for me, and as I entered she pointed
to the clock, which was then striking twelve.

Thinking of Friar Bacon, I exclaimed half aloud--“I wonder if he
reached home in time? What a flight, thirty-five million miles in less
than three hours!”

At this my wife shook her head, and remarked that bed was the best
place for me; and as she kindly assisted me to undress, I did not
contradict her.

When I awoke next morning I felt in a very unsettled state of mind, and
collecting my wandered senses, I endeavoured to account to my wife for
my absence of the previous day, by telling her of my adventure with the
monk in Horner Woods. She was moved when I told her that the paper in
my waistcoat pocket would _prove_ what I asserted to be true.

“Kindly feel in the right-hand pocket of my waistcoat, get out the
paper, and read for yourself,” I remarked quietly but triumphantly.

She felt as directed.

Nothing was there save a large hole!

I had lost the paper; and with it my character for veracity and the
knowledge of “How to Live for Ever” into the bargain.


AFTER CONCLUSION OF STORY.

I hardly like to say it, but I verily believe my guest had been
drinking heavily, and that he was suffering from _delirium tremens_,
or, as it is commonly called for conciseness, “the blues”; anyway, when
he left the caravan he was mumbling to himself, casting furtive glances
to right and left, and gesticulating very much as he walked down the
road. I am afraid I did the poor man a great wrong in giving him so
much raw spirit; but then I console myself with the knowledge that I
was only indirectly to blame, having merely placed the decanter upon
the table, as I would for any other visitor, and expressed a wish that
he would help himself; with which suggestion he complied by diminishing
my spirit store more rapidly than I had intended. The following day I
sent him a pamphlet upon temperance, as a set-off against my ill-timed
hospitality, and trust that he read it with profit.

My guest was such a confirmed believer in spirits that he would have
made a capital medium for any professional spiritualist. He was
familiar with almost every spirit nameable, and had been at one time or
other possessed of them all, knowing where to find both the best and
the worst of them.




V.

INTRODUCTION TO “BARBE ROUGE.”


The gentleman to whom I am indebted for the story of the old pirate,
“Barbe Rouge,” is now a well-known artist and author, and as I knew him
to be the hero of several adventures, I was anxious to obtain a story
from him. Having gained an introduction to him, I put myself in his way
when passing through Norwich. After a long chat, he expressed a wish to
inspect my caravan, which I had left at Thorpe, the prettiest village
in Norfolk, so we strolled down to it together.

Being of a roving and adventurous disposition, he showed great delight
at my house on wheels and its comfortable internal arrangements, and
having friends at Lynn whom he wished to visit, he begged to be allowed
to accompany me on my journey as far as the borders of the county. I
readily acquiesced, and found him such a companionable fellow, that our
roundabout journey to Lynn--distant some fifty miles by the nearest
road from Norwich--actually took us _three weeks_ to accomplish. My
comrade was delighted with the gipsy life, and but that his leisure
time was at an end, he would have accompanied me further on my
progress through the fens of Lincolnshire.

We met with several adventures while we were together, one of which I
must relate.

Harry Nilford (such was my friend’s name) strolled out one evening to
indulge in a bath, while I stayed in to cook the supper, it being my
day for _chef_ duty; and as we were camped within a mile of the sea,
between Blakeney and Morston, I expected him back in about an hour
or rather more, but it was upwards of two hours before he returned,
looking very excited. He had taken my gun with him, thinking it
very probable that he might come across a stray rabbit for the pot,
and I naturally inferred, from his sparkling eyes, that he had been
successful in his quest.

“What do you think I’ve shot, old fellow?”

“Rabbits?”

“No; guess again. Something bigger and rarer.”

“Well, then, a hare?”

“No--bigger and rarer still,” said he, smiling at my puzzled look.

I guessed all kinds of things, but was every time wrong, so I asked the
question--

“Is it fish, fowl, or fur?” I have heard of large fish being shot, so
included it in my query.

“Well,” said my friend, “it is fur, and I might almost say fish also,
for it is a splendid swimmer.”

I puzzled over the riddle for some time, and then, after having failed
in guessing an otter, gave it up as something beyond me.

“Then if you cannot guess, or even get near it, I will tell you. It
was _a seal_--a very rare visitor to this coast indeed, in fact, such
a thing has not been seen for many years along the hundred miles of
coast which bounds the county of Norfolk.”

He had shot the seal as it flippered itself along the yielding sand,
upon which it had been basking, to make its escape to the sea. Both
barrels, however, did not suffice to kill it, and the animal got to the
water, and would have made its escape, although severely wounded, had
not Harry rushed into the sea and given the soft-eyed seal its quietus
with the butt of the gun.

It was too heavy for him to bring away, and was, moreover, covered with
blood, so he dug a shallow trench in the sand, and placing the body in
it, covered it up and left it.

We arranged to go down to the beach early in the morning and bring our
prize back in triumph; accordingly, about seven o’clock next day, we
went, but to our astonishment the seal was gone!

Could it have revived and made its escape?

We searched about for signs.

We noticed footmarks leading down to the water’s edge, and also the
prints of a dog’s paws in the sand, and, lower down still, we saw where
the keel of a boat had cut its way when rowed ashore and beached.

We put these things together, and came to the conclusion that my friend
had been watched and the seal stolen after his departure. Anyway it
was gone; and although we inquired at both Blakeney and Morston, and
offered a reward, we could learn no tidings of the missing animal.

We went sorrowfully on our way, and two days after were at Burnham
Thorpe (Nelson’s birthplace), when we heard at the village inn of a
hairy mermaid being exhibited at Brancaster. We took no notice of the
news but when we reached the village with a Roman name, we found the
people quite excited over the wonderful mermaid, and with numerous
other visitors paid our pennies to go in and see the curiosity--when
behold, it was Harry’s seal!

Of course Harry demanded it, but the men would not give it up, and as
Brancaster does not contain a policeman, force had to be resorted to.
My friend was a big, strong fellow, and I being scarcely less in size
or strength, we made a good fight of it, and placed the seal in my
van and made off. The villagers became very abusive and threatening,
and many missiles were thrown at us, but we got away as quickly as
possible, I handling the reins, and Harry keeping off the crowd with a
gun in one hand and a whip, which he used pretty freely, in the other.

We had three panes of glass broken, sundry cuts and bruises, and a
black eye, which latter fell to my lot, on our side. We could not quite
tell the number of the evening’s casualties; all we knew was that more
than one bloody nose and contused cheek were to be seen.

The seal was skinned and dressed in Lynn, and Harry had a waistcoat
made for himself, and a fine lappet cap for me, which has been a great
comfort in winter travelling, when the easterly winds are blowing.

The following story of “Barbe Rouge” he kindly touched up, at my
request, after I had written it, as I received it from his lips while
in a mesmeric state, for, being a story within a story, it is rather
difficult of interpretation. The case stands thus: “Barbe Rouge,” a
piratical sea dog of the eighteenth century, enacted a tragedy, of
which he left a record, which record, a hundred odd years later, was
found by my friend, Harry Nilford, on the Isle of Jethou, one of the
Channel Isles. The story of the tragedy he committed to memory, and in
a hypnotic state recounted to me.[A] Being a complex story I have, as I
mention above, requested him to touch it up here and there. This he has
done with the following result.

  [A] Those of my readers who would like to read the adventures of Harry
  Nilford should obtain _Jethou, or Crusoe Life in the Channel Isles_,
  published by Messrs. Jarrold and Sons, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane,
  London, E.C.


BARBE ROUGE.

Visitors to Guernsey will remember that opposite the entrance to the
Harbour of St. Peter Port, at a distance of about three miles, lies a
curiously-shaped island called Jethou, which rises from the sea in a
graceful curve, and looks at first sight like an immense turtle, or a
huge floating dish-cover. It is a small island, probably not more than
a third of a mile long and a quarter of a mile broad, but is so steep,
that in the centre it reaches an altitude approaching three hundred
feet.

It is a solid granite island, covered in most parts with bracken and
furze, which makes it a very paradise for the rabbits with which it
abounds. There are two small stone-built houses upon it, around one of
which is a prolific fruit and vegetable garden. There are out-buildings
attached, and at a distance of nearly a quarter of a mile from the
white house is an apology for a harbour.

It is a remarkably nice place for a holiday--sunny, healthy, quiet, and
not too far from aid in case of sickness or accident; but it is not a
resort for the general public, being private property.

It was on this island that in 186-- a young Norfolk gentleman elected
to spend twelve months as a recluse, or as he was pleased to term it--a
Crusoe.

He went to the island for two reasons; one of which was the
anticipation of a happy and adventurous time, and the other the winning
of a wager (that he would not leave the island before twelve months had
expired). In neither object was he disappointed.

While papering the walls of his little sitting-room, he had the good
fortune to find a parchment, hidden away in a niche in the wall, which
had hitherto been concealed by the thick covering of wall-paper, of
which he peeled off no less than five layers. He had read Edgar Allen
Poe’s story of “The Golden Beetle,” and finding a parchment covered
with hieroglyphics, he surmised that if he could only decipher it there
might be as thrilling a sequel as followed on the solution of the
cryptogram in Poe’s story.

Unfortunately he was not so clever as the man in the story, and
failed--unassisted--in discovering the secret of the parchment.

The puzzling document was a list of some sort which the finder could
not understand, as it was in French; beneath it was a drawing of a
square with a human skull in the centre, from which radiated lines
ending in certain letters, and having figures upon the rays.

The solution was discovered, however, after the young Crusoe had been
on the island for upwards of twelve months (he stayed eighteen months
in all), and in a most unexpected manner.

Being a Crusoe, it was not at all a surprising matter that he should
have a man Friday, and one day during a storm a Friday really did
appear, in the form of a French sailor, whose little vessel was wrecked
upon the hostile granite shores of Jethou. The man saved, the sole
survivor of a crew of four, was at once christened Monday, from the day
on which he was saved. This man (Alec Ducas) spoke very fair English,
and the two young men soon became fast friends.

One day the young Englishman, whose name was Harry Nilford, bethought
him of his curious parchment, and producing it from his box, asked his
friend if he could decipher it. The first part of the document was
quickly read, and no doubt astonished the finder. It was as follows--

“THIS IS THE LAST WILL of Jean Tussaud (sometimes known as Barbe
Rouge), Master Mariner, of C----.

“The person who is lucky enough to find my treasure-house, I hereby
declare to be my heir, and whatsoever he finds shall be his, and for
his sole benefit.

“My chief mate, William Trefry, a Cornishman, wished to become my heir
before my death, but we could not agree upon that point, although
I gave him possession of my _petites fées_ (little fairies) and a
key, also a valuable knife, for an inheritance. The bearings of my
treasure-house are these.”

Then followed the curious drawing with the death’s-head centre,
followed by the words--“The lucky one will find the following property.”

Here followed a long list of the articles stowed away; winding up with
the words--“and my box of pretty _petites fées_.”

       *       *       *       *       *

  “I leave Jethou to-night to make a voyage to the West Indies, to see
  what business can be done there. I leave this paper so that, should
  I never return, the goods I have so industriously, and at such risk,
  gathered together, may be of service to the person who may have skill
  enough to discover their whereabouts.

                           “Signed, JEAN TUSSAUD (Barbe Rouge),
                                                  “_February 19, 17--_.”

For weeks the two young men puzzled their wits over the document;
but to abbreviate this narrative,[B] they ultimately succeeded in
discovering the place of concealment.

  [B] The unravelling of the enigma may be found in _Jethou_.

It was in the centre of the garden, at the rear of the house, and after
great toil in digging they came upon the skeleton of a man, and were
about to fill up the large hole they had made, imagining, in their
horror, that they had come upon a grave instead of a treasure-house,
when one of them saw a glittering something protruding from the sternum
of the skeleton, which proved to be the jewelled haft of a dagger,
which had undoubtedly given the death-blow to the tenant of the grave,
being driven in with immense force, up to the hilt, quite through the
breast-bone. Clearing the bony relic, they found, suspended around the
neck, by a length of silver chain, which was much oxidized, a couple of
rusty keys.

This discovery led them to connect the skeleton with the mate, Trefry,
mentioned in the document, and they continued their search, which
was rewarded by their finding a large collection of miscellaneous
articles, among which were numerous weapons, bundles of gold lace,
several cups of the same metal, packages of once costly clothing and
fine linen (now mouldering with age), copes, chasubles, and a beautiful
jewelled mitre wrapped in a bullock’s hide, boots, sashes, etc.

Beneath all these, in a hollowed space, was a chest securely padlocked,
which was duly hoisted out and burst open, and in it were discovered
seventeen bags, each containing a hundred Spanish doubloons, three
parchment books, and last, but far from least, a small golden casket of
exquisite workmanship, filled quite full of precious stones in their
natural, rough state, except a very few which were cut and polished.
In all they would have filled a pint measure. These were Barbe Rouge’s
_petites fées_--his little fairies.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now what I have recounted so far is a kind of prologue to what
follows. The purport of my story is to show how the skeleton came in
the treasure vault, which was opened by our good friends, Nilford and
Ducas, with whom, however, we have nothing further to do.

I must point out that the following narrative is what I have gathered
from the pages of one of the three books found in “Barbe Rouge’s”
chest, two of them being logs of his voyages (and _such_ voyages), and
the third a kind of private diary. I have pieced together the somewhat
disconnected jottings of Red Beard into the following story, drawing
_slightly_ on my imagination to fill in the gaps.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the morning of April 28, 175--, the vessel owned and commanded by
“Barbe Rouge,” called _La Chauve-souris_, was lying quietly at anchor
in the little haven at the back of the lofty pinnacle of rocks known
as La Creviçhon, for she was to sail on the morrow, or the second day
at latest, for a cruise in the West Indies. She was a smart little
schooner, mounting ten guns, and carried the large complement of
thirty-eight men, for she was what the French Government were pleased
to call a licensed privateer, although, if public report went for
anything, she might with more propriety have been stigmatized as
something with a much more ugly name. Whatever people might call her
was no concern of Jean Tussaud (which was Barbe Rouge’s real name),
_he_ called her a privateer, and so we also will call her, for the word
_pirate_ is not at all a nice-sounding word.

She had some weeks previously returned from a very prosperous cruise
in the Mediterranean, and although she came home short-handed, to
the extent of eight men, she brought with her, as some sort of human
equivalent, two very fine women, both of whom were young and handsome.

One was a fair Circassian damsel called Retté, and her companion, an
English girl named Mary Whitford. These fair ones Barbe Rouge had
taken from an Algerian vessel which he intercepted on her voyage from
Cyprus to Dargelli, whither the girls were being conveyed to the sheik
Obdurrah, as reinforcements for his harem. How the girl Mary Whitford
could thus be sold Tussaud’s book says not; but he captured her, and
brought her and Retté to Jethou, where he took them ashore to his stone
house, much to the regret of William Trefry, the mate, who had fallen
greatly in love with Mary during the voyage home. Barbe Rouge saw what
was in the wind, and watched the couple unnoticed, but with a hawky,
jealous eye.

Trefry feared his skipper, for he had seen him perform cruel deeds that
made the boldest heart on board tremble, and because Barbe Rouge’s
giant form possessed the strength of two men; so, fearing any personal
encounter, he resolved by stratagem to carry out a scheme for Mary’s
release which he had been elaborating during the last few days of the
voyage.

He foresaw that the two girls would be immediately taken ashore on
the arrival of _La Chauve-souris_ at Jethou, and with this in view
he arranged two or three plots with Mary, by which they might escape
together to Guernsey; they also arranged a set of private signals with
which to communicate with each other.

As anticipated, an hour after reaching the haven of Jethou, Mary
and Retté were taken ashore, and, alas for their hopes, the girls
were quartered in a room which did _not_ overlook the haven; and
furthermore, they were only allowed out for exercise after dusk, when
their jealous protector, Barbe Rouge, accompanied them for a walk round
the island.

Thus were their signals of no more avail than a wink in the dark.

The days sped rapidly; boats went to and from St. Peter Port bringing
stores and taking various goods for sale. Half-a-dozen carpenters and
a smith, besides the sailmaker and others, were busy with the ship’s
hull and rigging, refitting and altering, repairing and renewing all
kinds of gear, and over these men was placed Trefry, to whom the whole
crew looked up as skipper during Barbe Rouge’s frequent and prolonged
absences ashore on Jethou.

The young Englishman gnawed his very heart away in devising schemes
for Mary’s release, and his eyes grew weary with looking for the
preconcerted signals from her, but none ever appeared.

Could she have forgotten him?

Was it a case of “out of sight out of mind”? No, that could never
be, for the girl’s anxious desire was to escape, and reach her dear
old Yorkshire home, from which she had been absent nearly two years.
She had left it to take a trip on her uncle’s bark, _The Develin_,
from Whitby to Samos in the Grecian Archipelago, in company with her
brother, who was two years her senior.

They reached Samos safely, but one morning, her uncle and brother
being ashore, two native boatmen came alongside, one of whom, in fair
English, said the old gentleman had sent them “to fetch Mary, to show
her some of the sights of the place.” Mary accordingly seated herself
in their boat, but the men took her to another port, a league up the
coast, and thus kidnapped her.

As the days before sailing to the West grew fewer, Trefry became nearly
mad with his pent-up feelings; but in the presence of Barbe Rouge had
to dissemble and assume as calm a countenance and manner as he possibly
could, although at heart he could have wished the old pirate hung at
the end of his own gaff.

Only two or three days intervened before the date of sailing, and his
very appetite forsook him, and he could not help glaring at the skipper
whenever they met; but Barbe Rouge, with an imperturbable countenance,
took no notice of the mate’s despair, although he well knew what was
passing in his heart; he saw the young fellow’s terrible struggle with
himself, and gloated over it.

Trefry dared not make an open show of concern about Mary, as even at
the last moment there might arrive the opportunity for a rescue, so he
held his peace till the morning of April 28th.

As the first grey streak of dawn appeared in the N.E. Trefry stepped on
deck and strained his eyes towards the stone house on shore. It was too
dark to discern anything in the form of a signal, but he looked ever
and anon, and to his great joy did not look in vain.

He could scarce believe his eyes when he saw something appear out of
and above a chimney on the old house. It was but a wisp of rag, but it
was quite sufficient to denote its purpose as a signal, and Trefry knew
its meaning to be an urgent appeal for succour.

One or two of the crew also saw it, and it soon became known to the
whole ship’s company that the girls were making signals for help; but,
though comments were many, no one dared take any action, for the crew
of _La Chauve-souris_ was, as often happens on privateers and suchlike
vessels, divided into little coteries, each afraid of, or watching the
actions of the others.

Barbe Rouge had devotees numbering about twenty, while those whom
Trefry could rely upon to take his view of anything on the tapis, he
could count on the fingers of his two hands.

Moreover only one day remained. What could he do?

He thought over many schemes for liberating the girls, but could not
hit upon one likely to be successful; so, finding his own imaginative
faculties at fault, he called two or three of his more intimate cronies
together, and placed the case before them in a council in the captain’s
cabin, while one kept watch.

Many suggestions were made, of various degrees of practical merit, some
indeed so sieve-like that they would not hold the water of common-sense
at all. Trefry soon found that, great burly brute as he was, Barbe
Rouge had a strong following of staunch men on board; men who loved the
skipper because their natures were coarse and rough, and who saw in him
the beau-ideal of brute strength, stature, and power to command: his
very courage and daring delighted them. Sentiment, and the wrongs of
others, were nothing to such as they.

Trefry found that, all told, he could only count on eleven others
besides himself to help him in the contemplated carrying off of the two
girls; but, to better equalize the numbers, he determined, after dark,
to give leave to six or eight of the skipper’s staunchest men to take
the long-boat, and pull across to Guernsey for a spree.

This was agreed to as part of the programme; and it was also agreed,
that at eleven o’clock that night he should go ashore alone to the
stone house, and bring off the girls, while his eleven comrades should
arm themselves (from the arm-chest, of which he had the key), and make
themselves masters of the ship while he was ashore.

The day passed slowly by, and the shades of night at length fell,
draping its mantle of deepening blue over the pretty little island.

At eleven o’clock Trefry, well armed, went ashore as arranged.

The night was dark, for there was no moon, and calm, for there was but
little wind.

Quietly he crept round the side of the house, and taking off his boots
went up the stone steps leading to the garden at the rear, where he
quickly became aware of a faint glow of light rising from behind a
tremendous mound of earth in the very centre of the garden.

He paused and listened; then silently crept across the garden on all
fours to the mound, up which he as noiselessly climbed, and peeped
over.

He beheld a great excavation several feet square, from which the light
came, and peering over the edge, he saw on the opposite side of the
wall of the hole, the shadow of Barbe Rouge’s great head and beard,
projected by the light of a lantern placed on this side of the pit. The
shadow moved but slightly, showing that the fiery skipper was deeply
engrossed in some task or other of a weird nature, or he would not have
chosen night for his work.

Like a flash of light it entered Trefry’s brain that the old buccaneer
had killed the girls, or at least one of them, and was now hiding the
evidences of his guilt by burying the body in the garden.

However, there _might_ still be a chance that they were alive; and not
to leave a stone unturned, he resolved, now that he knew Barbe Rouge
was in the hole, to go round the house and gently tap at each window,
to endeavour to obtain a response from those he was in quest of. This
idea he carried into effect, but without receiving any reply to his
tapping, and he again went to the mound and peeped over--Barbe Rouge
was still busy, as his shadow, bobbing about in the uncertain light of
the horn lantern, proved.

Could it be possible that the skipper had left the door of the house
unlocked? He would see at all events, and back to the house he went.
Upon pressing the handle, to his great joy the door swung back, and he
quietly entered. For fear of being discovered, should Barbe Rouge enter
the doorway, he leaned a stick, which he found in the passage, against
the door on the inside, so that any one entering from without could not
fail to knock it down with a clatter upon the stone floor, and thus
give him warning.

Carefully he searched each of the five rooms which the house contained,
breathing ever and anon the names of Mary and Retté, but when he came
to the last room, and found it empty, his feelings overcame him, and,
but for some wine which he discovered on a table, he would certainly
have fainted with horror, thinking that his Mary and her companion had
been cruelly murdered, and were now being buried by his captain, the
dreadful Barbe Rouge.

More wine; and then he gradually grew into a frenzy, swearing that but
one task remained, which ere he left Jethou should be accomplished.

This was to revenge the deaths of Mary and Retté by killing the monster
who was now sitting in the pit, which in another minute should be
his tomb. Burning with rage, so that he shook in every limb, he had
difficulty in calming his feelings sufficiently to accomplish his task
in an unfailing manner.

He paused to calm his quivering nerves, and then went gently along the
passage, pistol in hand, to where he had left the broom-stick at the
door. It remained as he had left it; so he quietly leaned it against
the wall, and nervously began to open the door, for fear the giant’s
form might be about to enter.

Inch by inch it opened and he peeped out.

All was quiet.

With his pistol still grasped tightly he made for the mound, intending
to shoot Barbe Rouge in his self-made grave, but before reaching
the spot, he fell prone over a large piece of granite rock; he lay
perfectly still, for fear Barbe Rouge should peep out of his hole to
see what had caused the noise.

[Illustration: “Suddenly a heavy hand seized him from behind.”--_p.
121._]

For some minutes he lay silent but alert; then, as the skipper did
not appear, he arose, returned his flintlock to his belt, and picked up
the huge stone at his feet.

This he resolved should be the instrument of Barbe Rouge’s death--a
stone for a dog--reserve the bullet for a nobler foe!

Up the bank of earth he staggered with his burden. Yes! Barbe Rouge was
still at work--he could see his white stocking cap and the shaggy red
locks beneath; so, pausing, he raised the mass of stone high above his
head, thinking to hurl it down with crushing force upon the cranium of
the monster below, when suddenly a heavy hand seized him from behind,
and the stone, losing its balance, fell from his grasp with a thud
into the hole. He gave one glance round, his last on this earth, for
his eyes met the infuriated orbs of Barbe Rouge himself, who, with a
stroke swift as sight, drove a long keen dagger deep into the young
Englishman’s breast. Without a groan he fell dead into the yawning gulf
before him.

       *       *       *       *       *

With a chuckle at the success of his fiendish work, Barbe Rouge quietly
descended a short ladder into the great vault he had dug, and took out
a book from an iron-bound chest at the bottom, in which he calmly wrote
certain notes, stating that he had killed Trefry for endeavouring to
meddle with his “_petites fées_,” or little fairies, but whether he
referred to the two girls or the gems is not very evident.

Trefry was a doomed man from the time he stepped ashore, as, through a
spy on board _La Chauve-souris_, Barbe Rouge was cognizant of all that
had taken place on board the schooner. He received information that
Trefry would come ashore between eleven and twelve, and had prepared a
ruse to deceive and place him at his mercy.

He made a dummy head with a red tow wig and beard in imitation of
himself, and on the top placed his old white stocking cap. This little
device was fixed at the bottom of the excavation upon a cross pole
fastened to an upright. At the end of the cross pole which touched the
ground a live rabbit was fastened, that, moving about a foot from right
to left, the dummy head was made to oscillate. A lantern was so placed
as to throw a shadow of the head upon the side of the pit farthest from
the house, and the trap thus artfully baited caused the downfall of the
gallant young Cornishman, Trefry.

Barbe Rouge signified his intention of leaving Jethou with his fair
ones next day for a voyage to the West Indies, and from a record in
a St. Peter Port document, we find that he actually did sail on May
1st, after giving a grand farewell entertainment to many of the good
townspeople of St. Peter Port on the previous evening.

Thus we see that virtue is not always triumphant, and that every dog
has his day, including the somewhat numerous species known as the Sea
Dog.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a year or two I met the adventurous Nilford again, when he
informed me that he had put my van quite in the shade by a novel idea
of his own. It appears that he was so struck with my mode of life that
he purchased an old gipsy-van, and rambled about in it for a week or
two together, just when the fit seized him. Then the idea occurred to
him of making a pair of boats, into which the wheels of his van were
fitted, and by decking the space fore and aft between the boats, he
went all over the Broads, and finally coasted it to Essex, whence he
had the good or ill luck to be blown over to Holland. As he has written
the history of his adventures, it is no business of mine further to
divulge them here, but will content myself with calling the reader’s
attention to a book entitled, _Afloat in a Gipsy Van_.[C]

  [C] Jarrold and Sons, 10 and 11, Warwick Lane, London, E.C.




VI.

INTRODUCTION TO “ROBIN HOOD IN WINTER.”


I have somehow a knack of running against men who, without being
notable, have still something in their composition which makes them
conspicuous among their fellows. Such a man was he from whom I obtained
the following story; for it was told me first by my informant _vivâ
voce_, and afterwards corrected by him, with an ancient quill pen,
which had a habit now and again of spattering the ink, after the
fashion of a pyrotechnic display, wherever there happened to be any
roughness of the paper. He loved the antique, and lived a long way in
rear of the times; quill pens were natural pens, he said, and he would
have nothing to do with the modern steel rubbish, as he disdainfully
termed our great up-to-date invention. His house, furniture, and
clothes were antique, and so were his very person, face, and figure.

He was short, thin, curved, and drab. I say drab, because no other
colour will so well describe his complexion, which was of a parchment
hue, and of the same leathery texture. Small slits of eyes, a hooked
nose, wide mouth with thin lips, hollow cheeks, and a broad and high
forehead; that was the facial appearance of my learned friend, the
antiquary.

I met him near Birmingham, whither he had been to purchase a bundle
of old books, with which he was wearily toiling onward to his village
home. He sat by the roadside on a grassy bank with his treasures, girt
about by a strong leathern strap, by his side.

Being a very hot day, the old man had a large red bandana handkerchief
in his hand, with which he patted his perspiring face. I asked him, by
way of obtaining an opening for a conversation, if I was on the right
road to Coventry, whereupon he informed me that he was walking to
Meridew, a distance of twelve miles along the road to Coventry, and if
I would give him a lift he would act as guide.

I obliged the old man, although I knew the road perfectly, having
travelled the district before, but, as I love companionship, I thought
it a good opportunity for indulging my hobby.

I found the old gentleman excellent company, and on arriving at
Meridew, discovered that he owned a very pretty, little, old-fashioned
house standing in its own grounds. Being both good talkers, and our
ideas running mainly in the same groove, my new friend invited me to
spend a few days with him, and I gladly availed myself of his kind
hospitality.

The story of “Robyn Hode in Winter” he had discovered at an old book
shop at Coventry, and was lucky enough to become owner of the precious
document, for the insignificant but handy coin yclept a shilling. He
had read and re-read the old parchment so many times, that he had quite
got it by heart, and so much had it engrossed his mind, that when I
put him to sleep one evening he reproduced it vocally, as if he were
reciting it to an audience.

He had at different times discovered other very curious documents,
copies of which he pressed upon me, and some of them I may, at a future
time, venture to inflict upon the indulgent public.


ROBIN HOOD IN WINTER.

I, ROGER AYLMER, clerke to ye Abbot of Croweland Abbey in Lincolnshire,
doe hereby sweare that what I herein do write is ye fulle and whole
truth and nothing but ye truth of my seizure by ye outlawe Robyn Hode,
and that which I do heare write is to prove to ye Abbot of Fountaines
Abbey in Yorkshire, that I dyd to ye best of my mighte and courage,
seek to protect ye goodes belonging to him from ye rascally outlawe;
which sayd goodes were in my keepynge when they were by force y’parted
from me.

In October 1196 Our goode Father ye Abbot (of Croweland) dyd receiue
from Fountaines Abbey, an order for certain goodes to be sent thither,
to wit: six score yardes of Lincolne cloth, three score yardes of
scarlet cloth, certain rolles of leather and sundrie other goodes.

I was sent offe with four serving men and two yeomen, to whom, partly,
we looked for sustenance on our way, as the forests of Nottingham Shire
and Barneys Dale doe abound in many and gret dere, which be ye Kyng hys
property. Nevertheless, ye Kyng being away in Palestyne fightynge ye
Paynim, men doe take of hys dere withouten leve.

Our traine dyd consist of six mules, bearing ye goodes, and seven
others which dyd beare myself and my menne. Ye weather being clere and
colde we dyd make right goode waye, passing safely thro’ the forests of
Notts wyth but one mishappe.

At a lowe parte in a woode we dyd com upon a boggy place, near unto
which was a gret pool of water, engirdled rounde about with rushes and
eke with tall redes, and thynkinge it might be goode to water our mules
there, we dyd caste about for a patheway, to lede to the sayd water,
which anon we dyd find.

The yeomen led ye way, but we had not far advanced when a gret wild
boare, with horrid snortyngs and squeals dyd attack one of oure mules,
and although both yeomen with their longbows dyd fill him with sundrie
arrowes, yet dyd he not desist from his bellowing and goreing. Then
straightway dyd ye bowels of ye mule gush out upon ye grounde from ye
tearing of ye crewel tarshes of ye boare.

Seeing this, one of ye serving men dyd thrust thro’ the boare hys
bodie, a great spere, and fixed him to ye earthe; nevertheless no manne
dare venture near, so gret was ye rage of ye furious beast. Then dyd ye
serving men set upon him and overcame him, so that he preasently dyd
dye, and from hys carcase we dyd make a fulle hearty meale.

Ye mule which was y’stricken ded, was that on which we dyd carry our
cooking gear, the which being packed upon a freshe mule, he dyd rebel
at ye noise of the tinne and copper pottes and pannes, which as he dyd
gambol and kicke dyd make much dullor, till the mule being tyred with
his prancynge did act more peacefully and get him gone quietly.

Anon we reached ye forest of Barneys Dale, which as alle menne know is
ye chiefest haunte of that rascal outlawe, Robyn Hode and hys menne.

Entering into ye forest my menne dyd beg me to goe around, for feare we
might mete with ye bold robber, to which I dyd reply that “Were it in
the days of summer, ye name of Robyn Hode might scare even me; a manne
of much courage and stomach for ye fighte; but it being the wintertyde,
I cared nought for hym, as he woulde be hyding in some snugge village
on ye craggy moors. I woulde therefore hie me thro’ ye forest, without
let or hynderance, and see what manner of place Robyn dyd love, and
that with mine owne eyen.”

Into Barneys Dale we rode right merrilie, one of ye serving menne
playing blythely upon his sackbutt, y’whylst I dyd sing songs most
lustilie, soe that when we dyd join our voices in chorus, the foreste
dyd helpe us greatly to swell ye sounde, which dyd echo and ringe
against ye gret bowes and bolls of ye trees. Thys dyd we to keep in
goode hearte, and while we dyd thus divert ourselves, it being towards
ye houre of noone, we dyd com to a gret cliffe, near which dyd grow
manny noble trees, and at ye feet of ye cliffe dyd laye a mass of
tangled underwood and a faire barne or storehouse.

As ye winde dyd blowe somewhat sore, and ye gret cliffe dyd give
shelter therefrom, we dyd alite from our mules, intending there to
dress our victuals.

Finding a patheway or loke to ye foote of ye cliffe, we dyd secure
its shelter and lited us a fire, which was thereby screened from ye
colde winde. Then dyd we perceive that ye cliffe was full of gret holes
and caves, some of which were stopped uppe with rough bordes of wode
against them, which dyd make us marvel what might be behinde them.

Then did we guess what they mought be; and some sayd it maye be soe and
soe, and others sayed it is thys or that, till one sayd it maye be ye
hiding-place of Robyn Hode, in ye faire tyme of ye yeare, but others
sayd no, it is a place for woodemen and they who doe mynd cattel.

But one of my serving men being curious to knowe what was within these
caves, dyd with hys handes begin to pull downe some of ye boardes, ye
which dyd make a kynd of doorway, whereupon came an arrow, which dyd
pin hys hande to the woode, and he dyd cry out in gret payn for us to
release him.

Then ran forward Thomas à Boston, one of ye yeomen, to give succor,
but whan he dyd put forthe hys hande to plucke out the arrowe from hys
comrade, straiteway flew anoder arrowe, which smiting him on ye face,
dyd pierce his two cheekes, soe that ye feathers of the arrowe were wet
with hys bloude.

Anon came a loude voice which alle might heare, though ye speaker no
manne coulde see:

“Stande alle! Upon ye erthe your weapons throwe.”

Thys we dyd, when there advanced into ye lytell open space before ye
caves, a stalwart man y’clad in green clothe of goode pryce, having in
his hande a long-bowe to which an arrow was notched. At his right side
he dyd weare a goodlie sword, and from his left shouder hung a crooked
horne. He hadde on a mantel of sad color, but of thicke texture, to
keepe him from ye inclemency of ye weather.

“Who seeke you here?” he cry’d. “Why brake you downe in wantonness ye
dwelling of a poore forester?”

Then dyd I answer him and saye--

“We be but poore wayfayrers halting on our way to cook our store of
victuals, and dyd but mene to peep into the caves, to see if aney manne
dyd dwell therein this winter of the yeare.”

Then dyd ye manne, with a gret oathe, declare that never dyd he see
a poore traveller wend his waye through the forest with such goodlie
retinue and beastes, and that he must firste enquire into my state,
before I went thitherfrom.

With that he tooke his bugle and dyd blowe a lusty blast upon hys
curled horne, and anon came a reply from far awaye in ye foreste.

Then ye bold robber, for we dyd guess it was Robyn himself, dyd set
him on ye gnarléd root of a gret tree and waited patiently; and soe
perforce dyd we, being afeard of ye man. Nevertheless, I dyd gaze
my fyll upon ye bolde outlawe before me, and marry, he was a right
sturdy fellow, tall, and of a proportionate bignesse of lymbe, comely
of feature, and with a swarthy visage, hys hair and beard of ye sloes
colour, and eke had he the eyen of ye falcon; a very proper manne was
he and in hys pryme.

Anon as we dyd gaze upon him, and he at us, he dyd put to us sundrie
questions, which we dyd answer him very civilly. As he dyd thus
question us, and no man dyd come to the sounde of the robber’s bugle,
my other yeoman, Robert Baldrow, dyd rise up and saye to Robyn--

“Fellow, why doste thou stop peaceful travellers? Thou arte but one
manne and I another, and a staffe in my hande is as goode as one in
thine. Have at thee, knave!” and straightway he dyd springe before
Robyn, quarter-staffe in hande. Whereat Robyn set an arrow to his bowe,
makyng as if he would shoote, at the which Baldrow dyd cry out, “A
knave! a coward knave!!”

Then dyd Robyn droppe his bow and to it they went right merrile.

My manne Baldrow’s bloode was uppe, and eke was it downe, for Robyn
dyd give him such sounding thwacks, that the bloode did run adoune his
cheekes and drippe from his chin. Robyn, too, got manie a knock which
was harde, and his blacke bearde was rede with blode alsoe.

Bothe dyd swat greatlie, and blowe them like unto oxen, till Robyn by a
swingyne blowe, did bring Baldrow downe upon the grounde, where he did
crye lustelie for mercie.

While thys fighte dyd last, many great and lyttle men dyd hedge us
arounde, till there were quite a score and a halfe of them, and he who
appeared to be their leader was in stature ye largest man my eyen dyd
ever lite upon. When he stode besyde Robyn, his shoulder was a fulle
ynch taller than Robyn hys head; nor was he a thin wastreyl of a manne,
but proper and strong withall, and of about ye same age as Robyn Hode,
who dyd say he had y’seen thirty and fyve summers.

While the fighte dyd last, my four serving men, who be doubtless arrant
knaves, dyd steal away with four of ye mules layden with sundrie
goodes, which Robyn percevyng, he dyd secretly send hys men in searche
of them, and in goode time they dyd bring them backe, and deliver them
bound to Robyn.

Then Robyn swore a gret othe, that he had never met such scurvy knaves,
and did cause them to be bound with cordes to the trunks of fallen
trees, with their faces downwards. Then did foure of hys men belabour
their breeches with pliable saplings of ye ashe tree, till their
strength gave out, when the gret giant, whose name I did afterward find
to be Lytell John, did tell the whipped varlets to begone. But so sore
were their hams that they dyd but stir at the snail hys pace, makynge
y’while loud and sundry bemoanings, and walking in muche variety of
postures for they were sore hurte.

My mules were meantyme kindly treated, for their burdeyns were released
from them, at which I dyd not much joie, for I dyd knowe right well ye
character of myne hoste. The food stuffe for our sustenance was taken
by ye robber band, and putte in gret yron potts, beneath which fires
were lighted, and in but smalle tyme a goode meale was spred before us
alle.

They were a motley crew, and many of them dyd looke like unto beggars
(for tatters and dyrt) their clothes being very ragged and olde. Many
wore gret bands of hay round their legges to keepe them warme, and to
fend off ye wet from ye bracken and underwode.

They were not dressed as I had heard tell, alle in Lincolne greene,
although a few of the head menne among them dyd dress their lymbs in
that cloth, namely, Lytell John, George à Greene, Raynolde Greenleafe
and a lyttel man y’clept Muche who was sonne of a miller. Some sayd he
was y’clept Muche because he was so lyttel, but he was a jolly manne
withal and was foole or jester of ye party, and dyd keep them all in
goode humour lyke unto ye jester in ye Kyng hys court.

Another pretty manne was y’named Will Scadlocke, but as he dyd dress
hym in scarlet doublet, his comrades did name him Scarlett, from the
colour of hys dress. Many dyd weare buff leather jerkins and brown
hose, as it was ye tyme of winter when alle is browne and bare, but
quoth Robyn, “In the spring we do don our green raiment like to the
leaves of the forest, so that ye dere with their glittering eyen cannot
so readilie see us.”

Dere were not in plentye, but these bold foresters did make nomble pies
of their entrails, which they did salt in gret tubs during the summer.
It was a humble, but alsoe a toothesome dysh, when seasoned with sweete
herbes.

Robyn hys menne dyd attend to my two wounded menne, and dyd place them
on softe couches of bracken, which dyd lie hid in the caves. Me they
dyd lodge in a gret barne of wattle and clay, which dyd afford me good
shelter. Thys in ye summer was the resorte of cowherds, who dyd here
keep their store and eke slumber, driving in their cattel in stormy
weather.

In this shed or barne dyd stande much store of victuals for keepe of
ye robbers who dyd remain with their leader through the inclemency
of wintertyde. Floure and porke in barrels, pickled herryngs from
Yaremouthe; beanes, onions, and carrotes; beere and cyder in fayre
casks were in gret plentie, all of which store was sent in by ye
farmers for many myles around that Robyn might exempt their cattel,
menne, and goodes from hys seizure.

Robyn, goode man, dyd place alle my goodes and chattels in one of his
caves, that they might be safe from hys comrades, and that no manne
might take from them.

Next daye it dyd snow, and everything was covered from sight, and alle
assembled in the barne where they had buylt a woode fire, round which
they dyd sitte and laye as they liste. Some dyd sing songs, and Muche,
the lytell miller, dyd play them many tunes on hys pype, while another
merry fellow dyd beat lustily on a tabour or drumme, and thus dyd they
beguile the time away right joyouslie, whyle harmony dyd prevail; but
ye said harmonie dyd not laste longe, for one gret quarrelsome rascal
dyd grumble that the ale was too bittere with horehound, and some sayd
it was a righte goode brew, whereupon they fell to jangling, and the
manne who was of gret stature dyd challenge any one to crack his sconce
with a bout at quarter-staffe. Another manne, who was of the brede of
the greyhond, did thereupon rise uppe and tackle him, and atte it they
dyd goe for the full space of an hour; by which tyme he who was of
slender form, had lent his foe soe many and sounding thwacks that the
bigge man was fain to crie, “A goe!” and soe ye battel ended amyd muche
laughter.

Then goode Robyn dyd saye let us to some more songes and then early to
couche; for to-morrow is Christmas Daye. Then was a gret cup brought in
and filled to the brim with meade, which being a noble drinke, was but
for Robyn and me, Aylmer, his guest.

It was goode liquor, and we dyd sup it deeplie, when Robyn thinkynge
to fleer at my priestly garb, dyd aske me, “Coulde I wrastle,” and I
being a lytell in my cups, dyd reply that I could wrastle any outlawe
that was ever borne, though it was manie yeares since I had played a
boute.

Then dyd we wrastle before alle assembled, and they present dyd laugh
heartily to see the figure I dyd cut, being of great girth. Howbeit
I dyd styk to Robyn, and by a lucky chance dyd roll him over and dyd
sit on his backe, to make mirth for those present; but Robyn dyd not
laugh atte alle, being angered that a priest should thus him overthrow;
soe when I dyd let him uppe he dyd run at me with gret vengeance in
hys eyen, and he soe smote me on the stommick that I dyd pante right
mightilie.

Then was I also an angered manne, and having a strong arme dyd requite
Robyn with a gret blow of the nose, which dyd blede an it were a runlet
of goode rede claret.

To make peace, “Long John,” as I dyd hear Lytell John sometime called,
dyd com betwixt and dyd part us, and we ware carried off, each to hys
bed in a separate cave. So ended the Vigil of Noel.

The morne of Christmas Daye was one which dyd smile over the erthe wyth
gret brightness, and alle were astir betimes, and many went divers ways
into the woodes to seek for dere. They took but their bows and speares
in their handes, leaving the frieze covers of their bowes at home, as
there was no damp in the frosty air which might shorten their strings.

Robyn was very surlie, for he had gotten two blacke eyen, and his nose
was swollen and red like to ye haws which are sent for birdes food in
winter. I was much afeared of the manne, thinkynge he might doe me
some mischief for a revenge for ye blowe I had placed upon hys nose,
but we dyd shake hands and were friendly, and being Christmas Morne, he
woulde have me goe into his cave chambre and pray for him, which I dyd.
Althoughe an outlawe hys menne doe say he is of pious mind, praying to
ye Blessed Virgin at alle seasons, especially in tyme of gret peril.

When we had our prayers sayd, Lytell John dyd roar out with gret pain,
saying that his tooth dyd ache sore, and so it dyd prove, for no manne
dare go near him, so greatly dyd he rage. Then he cryd for some one to
pull it from his jawe for hym, but no manne dyd offer, tyll home came
Wayland, who had of olde tyme been a smyth, and used to the handling of
implements.

Lytell John dyd throw himself upon ye plancher in ye barne, and foure
of the strongest men dyd houlde him dowen.

Then dyd Wayland bring forthe hys tools, which he kept in a leathern
poke, for many a jobbe dyd he for the companie. Lytell John’s eyen dyd
roule muche when he dyd see the iron pincers, which Wayland dyd bring
forthe from the poke, but they being made for horse shoeing were too
large for his mouthe, and woulde not worke therein, although it was a
large one.

Then Wayland founde him a smaller pair, and with them went to worke
agen, upon which Lytell John dyd roar and struggle mightilie, but they
who held him being strong men he coulde not get free. Wayland dyd again
try, but being used to rough work dyd not set to worke skilfullie,
whereupon Will Scadlocke, who had now returned with two hares whych he
had shotte, dyd attempt to get out the aching tooth, and with such
address dyd he set to worke, that in but a few minutes he dyd drawe it
forth triumphantlie.

Then they dyd waken Lytell John, who had fallen into a kind of trance
(in whych he did groan), by rubbinge his face with snow and putting ice
on ye nape of hys necke.

Soone came home ye merrie menne, some with doe meat and some with a
gret dere they had slain; while Peter the falconer dyd add toe the
store, two ducks and a fine guse, at which there was great rejoicynge.

Three menne still were to come home, and their comrades dyd look for
them anxiously, fearing they had been taken by ye menne of Murdach,
Sheriff of Nottingham, but in tyme they came back bringing three gret
pikes, which they had snared in the river, beside gret store of perch,
which they had netted without asking leve of anney manne.

Guards were sette to the right and left of the campe, and fires y’made,
at which were dressed gret diversitie of dishes, and atte duske the
feaste was spread in ye barne. It was a feaste that woulde have graced
the Refectory of Crowlande Abbey, albeit it was served uppe in a
somewhat rough manner.

Fish, fleshe, and fowle of all kinds were there, and cyder and ale in
plentie, so that each manne dyd eat and quaff and sing and laugh, till
he coulde no more.

Then dyd they sitte and laye around the bigge fire and tell stories of
their deeds, which dyd shock mine ears exceedinglie.

By the fyrelight they dyd look a very desperate sett of menne, ye more
so when they had drunken of the goode rede wine, which Robyn had caused
to be broached.

Robyns nose grew redder as he dranke, and hys eyen being black he dyd
look most curious. Lytell John dyd have hys jawes in a slyng, as hys
cheeke was some deal painful after his toothe hauling. My yeoman,
Robert Baldrow, whose cheekes hade been shot through, was a silent
manne, for his mouth was bounden in a clothe through a hole in which he
dyd suck up some brothe through a hollow bunke.

Howbeit, for these lytell drawbacks, each man dyd enjoy himself
greatly, and dyd sing or daunce according as he was him capable, and
ye merriment was kept up for a gret many houres till many dyd drink
themselves to sleep, and their comrades dyd cover them with deer skins
and bracken, for fear they might be freesed, so colde was ye night.

“Not oft,” sayd Allan-a-dale to me, “do we have these galas, onlie now
and again, else myght the crewel Sheriff of Nottingham worke us some
ill.”

For several dayes more dyd Robyn keep me hys prisoner, and on onne day
I dyd see some of their famous archerie.

On New Yeres Day, Robyn, Lytell John and Scadlocke, had matched
themselves to strike as many arrows into a marke as any six of their
comrades. Thys wager was accepted by Much, Greneleafe, Allan-a-dale, my
man Thomas à Boston, Reginauld Foxe, and one they called “Humpy” from
his crooked backe.

A hare skin was stretched on a hoope of wode and placed as a pryke for
them to shote at, at a distance of eighte score yardes, and each manne
was to shote a score of arrowes at ye marke.

Robyn, Lytell John, and Scadlocke dyd shote first, and of their three
score arrows, a score and seventeen dyd stryke the marke, though Robyn
dyd not schote well, hys nose being as bigge as two, and was in hys way
when he dyd schote, so that but ten of his arrowes of the full score
dyd strike ye mark.

Then dyd Much and his menne in turn shote at ye marke, and of alle
their six score arrowes, two score and three dyd pierce ye skyn,
whereat there was much shoutynge and laughing by those who dyd behold,
and Robyn dyd look him ruefully to see ye prize, which was a flagon of
yelow wine, drunk by lytell Much and hys men.

On the 2nd of January, my yeoman being recovered of his woundes, Robyn
dyd give me leve for to goe on my waye. Whereon I dyd thanke hym and
ask for my gear, at whych he dyd laugh him outrighte in my face.

“Nay, Master Monk,” sayd he, “ye traveller must paye for hys fayre.
Have I not kept you and two menne and alle your mules these ten days?
Come quit thee hence, and thy gear I will keep in payment for thy
victuals and bedde.

“Come, begone! and a right pleasaunt journey to you!”

But I woulde not thus be putten offe, and dyd trye with my menne to
bringe forth the bayles of clothe from the caves, but the robbers tooke
them from us, giving us many cuffes and kickes for oure pains. Anon I
demanded my mules, but Robyn dyd say:

“Nay, brother, I have keeped ye mules for ten days for thee, and now I
will keepe them longer for mine owne use. Dere meate may become scarce,
then will mule meate be plentie.”

Then I dyd try and seize ye rascal by his ears, to give him som
chastisement, for we monkes be manie of us strong menne, being used to
much huntinge and hawkinge arounde our monasteries.

Thereupon dyd the giant Lytell John seize me and my men, and bynde us
face downwardes on our mules, and with many stripes of their bowes and
quarter-staves, they dyd beat us on ye uppermoste parts till we dyd
fairlie crye oute for mercie.

Then dyd Robyn say--

  “I doe gif you a present each of a mule. Commende me to your good
  master the Abbot, and begge hym to give us hys company in the merrie
  Maye dayes, and he shall meet with cheer over and above that which
  you have received. Fare ye welle.”

  Then the robbers dyd thwacke us again, tyll Robert Baldrow dyd slyp
  from hys mule by ye breakynge of hys strappes, and dyd begge Robyn to
  allow hym to remain and become one of hys menne.

  Atte which Robyn dyd laugh and give hys consent right readilie,
  striking hym on ye backe with hys palm to showe hys pleasure thereat.

  In three dayes we dyd return us to Crowlande Abbey, hungry nigh untoe
  dethe, and sore; where being kindlie entreated we dyd recover, and in
  the quiet of mine owne cell, I have written thys parchement to cleare
  my character of guilt.

  Shoulde ever I com across that rascal robber, Robyn Hode, I will soe
  bange hys carcase with my staffe, that hys skin shall be like a poke
  filled with odde bones.

                                                “Syned, ROGER AYLMER,
                                                       “Jany. 10, 1197.”


                                                  “CROWLANDE ABBEY,
                                                        “_Marche, 1495_.

  “I, John Wybourne, a monk of Crowlande Abbey, dyd fynde, in a strong
  chist of ye Ladye Chapelle, a document written by one Roger Aylmer
  in 1197, which dyd showe how he was taken by ye thief Robyn Hode and
  dyd spend ten dayes with hym in Wintertyde: the sayd document being
  soe badlie written and so badelie spelt that I have corrected itte to
  conform with oure modern spellynge.

  “Althoughe I have altered the wordes I have not altered the sense of
  the document, but merely for the sayk of our Abbey, I have set my
  hande to yts correction, that those who com after doe not blushe for
  shayme at Roger Alymer hys badde spellynge.”

       *       *       *       *       *

My old friend the antiquarian would have me drive him to Coventry on
my way thither, as he was particularly anxious that I should not miss
visiting the shop at which he had made such discoveries of ancient
parchments--parchments which, but for his discovery, would have gone,
sooner or later, to form the heads of children’s toy drums.

I cannot refrain from mentioning one little incident which took place
before we parted. My friend, in showing me the lions of Coventry,
took me into the Public Hall, where we found the old fellow in charge
busy cleaning the windows. We asked permission to look round, and
in speaking to the old custodian who was on the ladder I had some
difficulty in making myself understood. I said, “My friend, I am
afraid, although this is a fine hall, that its acoustics are very bad.”

To my surprise he gave a lengthy sniff and replied, “I don’t know about
that, sir, I’ve never had a complaint before, _I can’t smell anything_!”

I did not smile, but passed out quickly, for fear of an attack of
apoplexy.

In travelling from place to place I come across some strange incidents,
some of which are merely the outcome of simplicity or kindness of heart.

Thus at one village I visited, I happened to mention to the landlord of
the inn I was staying at that I had omitted to pack a tooth-brush with
my other impedimenta.

“Oh, I’ll soon set that right,” he replied, and darting from the room
quickly returned with a face beaming with pleasure.

“Here’s one, sir,” and he held out a tooth-brush; “you’ll find it’s a
very good one, for _I’ve only used it a few times_!”

Simplicity of manner frequently runs hand in hand with simplicity of
speech; as an illustration of the latter I may give a few words I once
heard delivered from the pulpit of a Primitive Methodist chapel, by a
good-natured, but somewhat illiterate preacher. He said--

“My dear frinds, coming to worshup this mornin’, I had a curious idea
come inter my head. I likened this chapel to a gret iron biler, and
you, my frinds, I likened to the dumplin’s a-being biled, while I was
the long wooden spune a-stirring on yer up! There, my dear frinds,
them were my thoughts when I was a-walking here this werry mornin’.”

What could be more graphic than such a charming and flattering
discourse? There could be no comparison between Cicero and this village
Hampden!




VII.

INTRODUCTION TO “ECCLES OLD TOWER.”


You must know, gentle reader, that at Eccles, a village of about a
score inhabitants, on the Norfolk coast, midway between Yarmouth and
Cromer, stands an old church tower. It is quite upon the beach, so that
at spring tides the “send” of the waves comes round the base of the old
flint tower, which must at some day, not far distant,[D] fall with a
mighty crash, a prey to the undermining and gnawing of the hungry sea,
which in its insatiable encroachment annually devours hundreds of tons
of the soft clay cliff, which at no point reaches a very formidable
height.

  [D] Eccles Steeple fell during a tremendous gale on January 23rd,
  1895, and but little remains of the huge pile except portions of the
  larger fragments which are still unburied by the sand.

North and south of Eccles the cliffs give place to sand dunes, or, as
they are locally called, “Marram banks,” which are kept in repair by a
tax levied on all the villages between Norwich and the sea, a distance
of nearly twenty miles. Norwich itself also contributes its quota, as
if the sea once broke through the banks it would, by ditch, marsh, and
river, run quite up to the ancient city, and submerge the portion which
is contiguous to the river Wensum.

The steeple at Eccles (or as it is called locally, and by the thousands
of mariners who know it as a landmark, Eccles Old Tower) stands just
above high-water mark, on the beautiful firm sands, for which the
Norfolk coast is unsurpassed. It is of flintwork, the lower part being
“knapped,” or dressed, and the upper part of the natural flint. It is
a circular tower with an octagonal upper chamber, but it is roofless,
doorless, and windowless, excepting that the apertures, greatly
decayed, still remain. The walls of the tower are unusually massive,
and the whole structure rises to an altitude of nearly seventy feet.

The body of the church was pulled down about 1603, being then in such a
bad state of repair that it was dangerous to passers-by; in fact, one
wall was actually blown down in a gale, and the other razed to prevent
an accident.

The foundations of the church still exist, but buried in the sand.
It was a small church (the nave being only some sixty feet long),
and as its remains are occasionally laid bare, the writer has had
opportunities of measuring the various dimensions. Although these
dimensions might be interesting to an ecclesiologist or archæologist,
they would be wearisome to our readers, as they have nothing whatever
to do with the story.

Round the huge fragments of the recumbent walls may be seen, after a
visit from a heavy north-west gale, the foundations of the cottages
which once formed the village. Cottage walls, out-houses, filled-up
wells, fruit-tree roots, etc., are to be seen in all directions, and
now and then, at rare intervals, a few coins and curiosities are
picked up. When the ruins _are_ laid bare, the place forms what might
aptly be termed the Norfolk Pompeii.

It was while I was sketching the old tower, one autumn day, that I
came upon a fisherman employed in breaking up some wreckage which had
been washed ashore. The timber being full of old bolts, and consisting
mainly of twisted, gnarled oak knees, was of no value save for
firewood, otherwise it would have been in the hands of the coastguard.
He was a very civil but reticent fellow, and I could not get a yarn out
of him by any means without exerting my hypnotic power, which I did,
obtaining, as a result, the following wild story.


ECCLES OLD TOWER.

I am only a plain fisherman, with but little book learning; but I think
I can muster up enough form o’ speech to tell you one of the skeeriest
tales you ever heard in all your born days.

It was the first week in January, 188--, that we had a dreadful gale
from the north-west which came at the full moon; consequently the tides
were high, and this here gale came with such a scouring force, that
the soft cliffs melted away like a lump of butter in the glare o’ the
sun. The sand was swep’ away right down to what you might term the
foundations of the shore, and everything laid as bare as my forehead.
I liken it to my forehead, which is kinder wrinkly, because there were
great ruts and scars along the beach which had once been holls,[1]
deeks,[2] and lokes.[3]

I and a mate o’ mine walked along the beach next day, just to see if
anything had been thrown ashore that would come in handy to a couple
of poor chaps like ourselves; but little did we find, for some one had
been pawkin’[4] before us. Still, we got a useful length of two-inch
rope and a couple of dantos,[5] attached to a score fathom of decent
net, so our walk paid for shoe-leather.

When we got to the third breakwater--for we live at Hasbro’--and peeped
over, we were wholly stammed[6] to see the old village of Eccles laid
bare and plain like a map. There was the walls of the housen standin’
up two foot and more in some places; and some of the door thresholds
were still there, with the wood as good as ever. We could make out the
shapes of the gardens, and could see where the fruit-trees had once
stood, by the roots and tree-bolls that still remained.

In grubbing about with a pointed boat-streak, I roused out an old
leathern bag with a golden guinea in it, and a piece of rusty iron
tangled in the strap, which might have been a knife or somethin’ of the
sort in days gone by.

Afterwards we looked over the churchyard wall, and to our surprise
found that many of the graves had been washed open; in fact, some of
the coffins lay there nearly level with the ground, for you know we
don’t bury very deep in Norfolk, not more than four foot, and only one
corpse in each hole.

The coffins wor of a different shape to what they make ’em now-a-days,
for they were long, like a seaman’s chest, but broad at one end and
narrow at the other, and the lid hinged on at one side.

Human bones were washing about in all directions, and a long line of
them lay among the rubbish left at high watermark. We found one immense
coffin near the north wall of the church, which must have been seven
foot long, if it was an inch. The lid was much decayed, and in some
parts broken away; so we thought it no sin to prize the rest off, and
see what was inside.

It was level full of sand, but when we scooped some of it out with
our hands, we came upon the perfect skelington of a man, black with
age, but nothing missing. It looked as if he might have been the
giant Goliar that we read of in the Bible. He was no use to us, so we
covered him up decent like, and as it was getting towards dark we took
ourselves home agin.

Next day I borrowed old Garrod’s dickey,[7] and rode up to Stalham, and
called on old Dr. Rix, for he was what some folks call a aquarian, or
somethin’ o’ that sort, and showed him my guinea in the bag, and the
old bit o’ steel; and he gave me just what I asked him for ’em, and
that was two-and-twenty shillings: he was pleased, and so was I, for it
was just as much as I could earn in a fortnight. I stopped at his some
time goldering[8] about what I had seen at Eccles, and he up and told
me, when I mentioned about the big skelington, that if I could bring
it to him _intack_--that’s not broken or any bits lost--he’d give me a
five-pound note.

Lor, I wor soon home agen, I made the old dickey fly as if the Old ’un
were arter us. Thinks I, this ought to be a single-handed job, and if
I take a big poke[9] and go alone, I shan’t have any one to dole[10]
out halves to. So I got my spade and a lantern, a poke, and a fairish
thumbpiece of bacon and bread, and everything else I wanted all ready,
and then waited till near midnight, so that I knew the coast would be
clear for the job.

It was a thick, starless night, with great grey snow-clouds rolling
about overhead, and the wind from the north-east was a regular
marrer-freezer, and I can’t say I much cared for the work in hand;
but, as the parson said when he went on a slide, “it’s foolish to turn
back,” so on I went. The road was frozen right nubbly, and made me
wobble about a bit, but by the time I got to the beach I was warm and
comfortable, and got along more comfortable-like on the frozen sand,
which was covered with snow in the hollows. The sand and foam from
seaward was a bit unpleasant, but I didn’t trouble much about that, for
my thoughts were a mile ahead, with the skelington waiting for me at
Eccles.

I had walked about half-a-mile along the beach, when down came the
snow, wreathing and tearing about all mander[11] of ways, and every now
and then I got into the centre of a whirl that pulled me up short, and
nearly took my breath away. This only lasted a few minutes, and then
the squall cleared off as suddenly as it came on, and I got on much
faster with my journey.

I passed the first and then the second breakwater, and by the light
that the sea always gives, I was picking my way along very nicely,
when, what should I see, but some one a-coming towards me along the
beach. I had not lighted my lantern, as I only wanted that for my
actual work, so it was possible the man approaching might not have
caught sight of me, and as I did not want to be seen by any one at that
time of night, especially by a coastguard, I dropped quietly on the
sand in a hollow, in hopes that whoever it was might pass me by.

Down I went on my stummick, but kept my eyes on the man approaching,
and found to my surprise that he was dressed in very light clothes; not
a coastguard, I thought, at all events.

Closer he came, and then I began for some reason or other to dudder[12]
and tremble, but I can’t tell why, perhaps it was the cold; anyway,
there was nothing I could see in the stranger that should fright me;
that is to say, not just then, when I felt the first symptoms.

But presently, when he came closer, I had some cause to shake, for
what I saw was a man in a long white smock, which blew out in the wind
behind him as he stalked along. The nearer he came the worse I felt,
for he seemed to grow taller and taller every step he took.

Would he pass me?

Yes!

No!!

No, up he came, right straight to me, and I felt like fainting--or what
I should fancy fainting was like, for I have never experienced it.
When he came close, I could not have stood on my feet for the value of
Norwich Castle; I was right terrified, although the man had not even
spoke a word.

As I looked up he towered above me like a lugger’s mast, and his great
bare legs were right against me. I panted, for I could not speak, but
presently, in a foreign sort of voice, the figure said--

“Hullo, my friendt, anything amiss?”

I looked at him again and my fear fled, for I immediately took him to
be a shipwrecked mariner, cast ashore in his sleeping gear from some
vessel.

My strength at once returned, and I stood upon my feet; but although
five feet eight in my socks, and weighing fourteen stone in my
oil-frock, I was only a baby by the side of my visitor, whose shoulder
was more than level with the top of my head. This did not frighten me
much, but when I looked at his eyes--Oh, lor! I thought I should have
dropped on all fours again.

His eyes were red and glowing like the port-light of a ship, and when
he spoke, the inside of his mouth seemed to reflect a fire, which must
have been raging in his internal regions.

I felt real bad, but could not keep my eyes off that huge face, with
its flaming eyes and mouth, and I vowed I would never come out,
single-handed, skelington-hunting again--no, not for the whole R’yle
Mint.

“Mine friendt,” said the giant, “you are just de man I wandt der see;
you haf a spade. You come mit me to Eccles?”

Would I? Could I say no?

I went.

We had but half-a-mile to walk, and that in a biting east wind, varied
with still more piercing squalls of snow and sleet, and I trembled in
every limb, while my heart rattled on like a donkey-engine getting in a
chain cable--all bumps and thumps.

I looked at the marrams,[13] and calculated what chance I should have
if I tried leg-bail; but when I looked at the length of my companion, I
gave it up as onpractical.

I was cold, although in what we call about here a “muck swat,” but my
new friend was all of a glow (especially about the mouth). He would
have made a rare fiery speaker for the House of Commons; he would have
frightened them that he couldn’t convince by his speechifying.

His conversation was dreadful--I don’t mean perfane or rude-like, but
the things that man told me made my flesh creep on my bones. He wanted
to make out to me that he had been buried three hundred years, just
before the old church was pulled down!

I can swallow a pretty thick strand of a yarn, but this here fellow
wanted me to swallow a whole cable, for he went on to tell me how, in
1584, he came over from Harlingen to Yarmouth, in a fishing-boat of
which he was mate, and that while ashore he one day fell in with three
or four fellows who were kinder interfering with a good-looking young
girl. Being strong he went for the whole set of them, and got the girl
away, but one of the gang struck him a blow with a heavy stick and
broke his arm.

The girl’s father came up and thanked the young Dutchman, and finding
that his daughter’s protector had broken a limb and could not work for
a week or two, took him to a surgeon and had the limb set. He left
him with the onderstanding that Dutchy would come and spend a week
with them, when the doctor had finished with him. The old fellow was
a farmer at Eccles, and being market-day, had as usual brought his
daughter with him to Yarmouth.

Well, up to there was what the play-actors would call Act One, and that
was all very nice and proper, but just you listen, and you’ll see how
it will turn out.

By and by away goes the young Dutchman to Eccles, and of course he
naturally fell in love with the mawther.[14] But she wouldn’t have him
at no price. No, she thanked him, and tried all she could to make him
comfortable, but--she already had a sweetheart.

This staggered Dutchy, but he had no idea of letting her go so
easily, and as every one in the village was afraid of the giant, the
girl’s father ordered the banns to be put up, to make sure that his
neighbour’s son should not be frightened out of his rights.

Dutchy tried all he knew to get the girl to alter her mind for a whole
week; and finding it in wain, he one morning disappeared.

That was what you might term Act Two. So far it had been all comedy,
as the play-actors call it, but the last act was a wiolent and wicious
one, as you shall hear.

The wedding-day came; the villagers flocked to the church; the ceremony
took place; the bells rang out; and, according to our custom, the
people fired their guns over the heads of the happy couple as they came
out of the porch, on their way to the home of the bride’s father.

All was perfect joy, but in another moment the joy was turned to
horror, for as the young couple came from the north porch, and turned
into the pathway leading round the foot of the old tower, a huge figure
(it was Dutchy) sprang upon them, and like a flash of lightning struck
them dead to the earth, before a hand could be raised to prevent it.
The reeking knife he calmly wiped, and thrust into his waist-belt,
and then stood glowering at the crowd, who kept at a very respectable
distance from him. He told them of the hard-heartedness of the girl,
and denounced her as she lay dead before him as an unfeeling creature,
and bade them know that what he had done was his mode of revenge, or
as he called it--Justice.

But where was the bride’s father all this time?

Well, he had been busy, as you shall hear.

It is the custom of we Norfolkers to give what we call “largesses”[15]
at marriages, comings of age, and suchlike; and on this occasion the
old man had pervided hisself with a little leather poke filled with
small silver coins, to throw among the assembled crowd, and indeed he
was occerpied in so doing when the death of his daughter took place. He
knew it was no use going for Dutchy single-handed, so he just stepped
behind the porch and loaded his gun with a handful of silver groats,
and when it was done sprang out, just when the giant had finished his
speech, and was turning to leave the place unmolested by the onlookers.

The old man shouted to him to stay or he would shoot; but, grasping the
knife in his belt, the young fellow walked away, without taking any
notice; whereupon the old man rushed after him, and aiming at his head,
fired.

“Der oldt man did shoot mit der gun right tro mine neck, and I seize
him, and gif him fon stap mit my knife, and den I vas dedt mineself,”
were the words of my uncanny companion.

Whether he killed the old man I cannot say, but he himself was killed,
and all this three hundred years ago!

And this was the gentleman I was taking a walk with, much against my
will, at night’s-noon, as we say.

But then he went on with a lot more strange talk, about how he had a
kind of holiday, or as we say frolic-time, ’lowanced out to him once
every hundred years, on the annewersery of the day when all this
piece of work took place; only he was not let loose, so to speak, till
midnight, and then for only three hours.

Well, I’d heard some tough uns before, and didn’t mind what I had
heard; but them eyes!--when I looked up at his face they bowled me over
altogether. He was no mortal, that I could take my davy on.

For a little Dutchy walked in silence, and I found _my_ tongue and
asked him if he didn’t fare cold, seeing he only had a kind of shirt on!

He turned his eyes upon me, and then I saw I had made a mistake in
asking such a question; fancy what a silly thing to ask a chap with
a furnace in his innards. But he was not put out at my question, and
wolunteered a explanation, as the saying is.

He opened his mouth and asked me to look into it. Well, if I live to be
as old as our neighbour Ives, and she is a hundred and three, I shall
never forget the sight. He blazed internally like a dustpan of live
coal, and the sight made my knees quiver, as if the heat of his breath
had melted my marrer, or whatever it is holds a fellow right up. I’ve
heard tell of men’s hearts waxing faint, and I do believe that that
night my bones were no better than wax, for hold my frame up straight I
could not, however I tried, and I am not reckoned a coward when any job
is on hand that wants a steady nerve and strong hand; and I’ve been out
on the sea some rum wather too, but the sight down this fellow’s throat
done me entirely.

When he had shown me his furnace below, he went on to tell me that
what I had seen was the sin burning within him, and it could only be
quenched by the forgiveness of the girl he killed three hundred years
ago.

Well, of course I could not say that that was all fudge, though I could
not believe him, but the funny part of it was, that when we got to
Eccles Old Tower there sat a young woman on the ruins of the porch in
a kind of night-shirt, as if she was waiting for us. That of course
showed me that there was some truth in what Dutchy had been telling me,
and when I nodded to the young woman, she gave me a very pretty smile,
and said she was glad to see me, and that now I had come matters might
be set right, and they could obtain a little rest.

Then she chatted on and told me that she had for a long time forgiven
Dutchy, knowing that he had that within him that must have burnt away
all sin long ago, but that without a mortal witness she could not
forgive him, as the sin had taken place on earth. She owned that it was
her cruel conduct that had brought on the Dutchman’s revenge, and now
before me as witness she would forgive him, and seal the forgiveness
with a kiss.

Lors me! when they kissed I thought the poor man would have been blowed
to pieces, for he exploded intarnilly with a tremenjous report, and the
flames shot out of his mouth, ears, and eyes like rockets, and went
wizzing away in streaks right over the marrams, where they were soon
swallowed up in the dark and thick air.

Now my legs did give way, and down I went with my back agen the church
wall, and although I was spellbound, I could see and hear all that went
on before me.

[Illustration: “By the sheen of the foam I beheld two skelingtons
sitting in their coffins.”--_p. 157._]

Dutchy, whose eyes and mouth no longer shone, snatched up my lantern,
stooped over me, and took my brass box of matches and struck a
light, then seizing the spade, he set to work, and very soon had the
huge coffin out of the sand. But the strange thing about it was, that
it was the very one I had come to rob, only now there were no bones in
it, and it dawned upon my stupid brain that Dutchy and the skelington
was one! Where he got his flesh and shirt from goodness only knows.

The young woman, who was very pretty and had long hair down her back,
which blew out like a ship’s pennant in the gale, helped the giant by
holding the lantern, while he did the work.

The big coffin being placed above ground, away they went round to the
other side of the church, where Dutchy set to work digging again, and
after a little while cleared the second coffin, which I reckon belonged
to the girl.

While this was going on I had raised myself on to my marrer-bones,
and with my fingers hooked over the old church wall was taking a view
of all their doings, and no doubt I was all eyes and mouth if any one
could have seen me.

Presently the giant up-ended the big coffin and got it on his shoulder,
and as he and the girl came round by the tower, she stopped and
actually asked for another kiss. Such a request took my breath away,
and to avoid the awful dullor[16] which I expected would follow, put my
fingers into my ears, but, would you believe me, it was as human a kiss
as ever you saw, and not even a whiff of smoke appeared, let alone a
tongue of flame, when their lips met.

He also carried the little coffin down to the water’s edge, and then
up he came, and dragged the big one down by the side of it, and there
they lay, for all the world like two boats.

Then back they came right to where I was, a-cowering by the flint wall,
and says Dutchy--

“Tank you werry much for der lantern and der spade,” and he held out
his great hand as he added, “Farewell.”

I was very loath, but I took it, and as true as I am alive, it felt
damp and cold like the hand of a dead man, and sent a thrill along my
backbone I shall never forget.

Then the young woman came forward and thanked me, and put forth _her_
hand for me to shake, and I shook something very like a fish, but did
not shudder quite so much, as I was a bit more used to it after the
first shock, so to speak.

After that they walked down to their coffins and each got into the
right one, and as I did not follow too close, Dutchy turned round and
beckoned me to him, and with fear and trembling I obeyed, and tottered
down to the water’s edge.

“Now, mynheer,” said he, “when you see der change kom, push der boads
off.”

I had no idea what he meant, but I shuddered out a kind of “Yes,” and
there they sat, till presently he cried out--

“Now den, push avay!”

As he spoke, I floated them off, and they appeared to melt partly away,
and to change colour from the pinky tinge of life to the grey of death.

They floated: and by the sheen of the foam I beheld two skelingtons
sitting in their coffins, scudding against wind and tide right out to
sea, slashing through the great breakers as if they had no more weight
or power than mists.

Dutchy’s skelington arm was round where his companion’s waist ought to
have been, when I last saw them, as they burst through a big old roller
that would have sunk a billyboy schooner.

Where they were bound for goodness only knows; neither do I care. All
I know is, that I got home some time or other, for when I woke up the
week after, they told me I was better, and that I had had brain fever.

When I got well, I went to Eccles to see if what I had got into my
brainpan was all moonshine or no, but if you’ll believe my word, the
two coffins I had seen dug up by Dutchy were gone sure enough, which I
take it proves my story to be ker-rect.

       *       *       *       *       *

My nautical friend, on leaving my van, had not the remotest notion that
he had told me a story, and as to my being able to send him to sleep,
why, he simply laughed at such a thing as an impossibility.

In his normal condition I tried in vain to draw him out to spin a yarn,
but although he owned that he knew some “real rum ’uns,” I could not
prevail on him to tell me one. He merely sat and smoked, and did little
more than carry on a disjointed monosyllabic conversation.

“Why will you not spin me a yarn, my friend?” I asked.

“Why, sir, you see,” said he, “I ain’t no scholard, and although I may
_think_ a great deal, I’m no sort o’ hand at _talking_. I never could
frame[17] enough to tell anything in a kinder pretty way like some
folks. No, sir, you don’t ketch me opening my mouth to be papered [put
in print] for gentlefolks to laugh and make game of me.”

That being so, I had no alternative but to make him a victim, with the
result chronicled above.


  EXPLANATION OF NORFOLK WORDS.

  [1] holl, _a ditch_.

  [2] deek, _a hedge-bank_.

  [3] loke, _a lane_.

  [4] pawkin, _hunting for wreckage_.

  [5] danto, _a fishing-buoy_.

  [6] stammed, _astonished_.

  [7] dickey, _a donkey_.

  [8] goldering, _chatting_.

  [9] poke, _a bag or sack_.

  [10] dole, _a share_.

  [11] mander, _manner_.

  [12] dudder, _to shiver_.

  [13] marrams, _grass-covered sandhills_.

  [14] mawther, _a maid, a young girl_.

  [15] largesse, _a gift_.

  [16] dullor, _a distracting noise_.

  [17] frame, _to use big words_.




VIII.

INTRODUCTION TO “THE MONK’S PENANCE.”


I have a friend who is a well-known ecclesiastic glass-painter, and
who, as a relaxation, delights in gardening; consequently he lives
just out of London, so as to be enabled to carry out his hobby for
horticultural pursuits. To work in his London studio during four days
of the week, and to reserve Saturday, Sunday, and Monday for his
country life is his plan, by adopting which he is neither a countryman
nor a town-dweller, but something of both: he is pleased to call
himself an “Urberusticite.”

Recently, when near the metropolis, I trundled my van down the North
Road to his snug little villa, and spent a few days with him.

I promised if he would help me in _my_ hobby, by one evening giving
himself up to me as a victim, that I would help him during the day with
his garden. And I _did_ help him, till every bone in my body ached
with the unusual exertion of digging, and wheeling gravel in a great
barrow. He gave me the hardest work he could possibly find, observing,
as he saw the perspiration streaming down my face, that “you will feel
quite another man to-morrow.” And so I did, for I was so stiff next
morning that I could scarcely raise my hands to my head, to comb my
tawny locks. After the toil of the day I was quite prepared for dinner
that evening, but when the meal had been eaten with keen appetite--for
gardening certainly does create havoc among the dishes--I prepared for
my revenge.

My friend was quite prepared to give me an opportunity of hypnotizing
him, _if I could_; but he laughed at the absurdity of the idea,
believing it, as he said, all moonshine, and asserting that he could,
by exerting his will against mine, prevent my passes having any power
over him.

I commenced operations upon him, and to my very great surprise signally
failed. All I could do was to produce a drowsy feeling in him, and
at length I gave it up for the evening, conjecturing that the manual
labour which I had undergone during the day had tired and weakened my
hypnotic powers. My friend was delighted at the failure, and laughed
very heartily at my discomfiture; declaring that the hypnotic power
I exercised was only efficacious in the case of young people and old
women, who had no power of brain to withstand my passes, but simply
gave themselves up to my wishes or will, like so many automata.

He was good enough, however, to give me another trial next evening, and
that I might not be tired he sent me to the river, at a short distance
from the house, to fish and--get back my “vanished will.” I was very
much piqued, but dare not show it, for my friend is a very demon at
sarcasm; so with rod and line I wandered off, and spent a quiet day,
reserving all my brain energies for the coming mental fray in the
evening.

In the evening, dinner being over, my friend signified his readiness to
commence, by making idiotic passes at the portraits hanging round the
room, and appeared to imagine that to hypnotize him was a thing not to
be accomplished, at least not by _my_ humble powers. So certain was he
that I should fail, that he was willing to do anything but give up his
will to me. He made fun of my idea of obtaining a story from him, even
if I _could_ put him to “bye-bye,” as he expressed it; and if I did
make him ass enough to divulge anything like a story, I should tell it
when or where I liked, or even publish it for the delectation of the
public; but, as he assured me he did not know a story, he could not see
how I was going to make him tell one.

All being ready, we commenced our little _séance_, and in two minutes
my victim was in a trance state. In spite of his bumptiousness and
disbelief in my powers, and in hypnotism generally, he related the
following very curious experience in his own career.


THE MONK’S PENANCE.

The profession of glass-painting is not exactly a precarious one, but,
unlike many others, it has neither season nor certainty with it. People
do not usually die to order, consequently, as Death hurls his dart at
irregular intervals, a glass-painter is at one time quite idle, while
at other periods, when he least expects it, the commissions roll in
“thick and threefold.” He cannot spread his work out over the year as
a mother applies jam to the bread of her eager-mouthed offspring;
but when certain work has to be done, the painter has to stick to his
task early and late, or the glass would stand in danger of becoming
“ancient” before it could be inserted in the church for which it is
intended.

Very well; just at the time the curious incident happened which I
will endeavour to relate, I was busy, very busy, and working in my
studio from nine in the morning till nearly midnight. I was restoring
a large window--the east window of H---- Church, Yorkshire--and had
been requested to have it finished and fixed again for the re-opening
ceremony on Christmas Day.

It was a late fourteenth-century window, of rare beauty both in colour
and workmanship, and contained many quaintly-drawn figures of saints
and martyrs of all ages. Among them was one figure on which a greater
amount of care had evidently been bestowed than upon any of the others,
especially in regard to the painting of the face, which was probably a
portrait.

The figure to which I wish to draw attention was that of a Dominican
friar, habited in the garb of his order, black and white in colour,
which made a fine contrast to the ruby background on which the monk was
placed in the window.

This “light,” as the panel is technically called, was in a very bad
state of repair, and as one of my assistants passed through my studio
on his way home, for he had finished his day’s work, he remarked that a
very little shaking would cause the old monk to fall from the leadwork
and demolish himself. To which I replied by asking him to make it his
first care in the morning to relead the figure, and thus render it
secure for a few more generations, as such fine figures were not very
frequently seen.

At eight o’clock I was left alone in the studio, as I had determined to
work on till midnight, and get my painting well forward for “firing”
(burning in the vitreous colours). Somehow I can always do a vast deal
more work when alone than when others are present, however quiet they
may be in their movements. There is in solitude nothing to distract the
attention, and one rapidly becomes absorbed in one’s work, which is
more expeditiously and accurately executed.

Ten o’clock came, and I prepared myself a cup of _café au lait_, and
smoked a cigarette. I cannot smoke and work at the same time, as many
artists have the knack of doing--for either my attention is more on my
cigarette than on my work (which is a loss of time), or I become so
engrossed with my painting that the paper cylinder is forgotten, and
goes out, necessitating frequent and irritating relightings.

As I puffed my little white tube of Dubec, I could not help taking
another look at the monk in all his glossy rigidity, and the thought
came into my head that being an ecclesiastic of the fifteenth century,
it was just possible that the monk so carefully delineated was a
portrait of the painter of the whole window!

Why not?

Who could tell?

There he hung, upon a glass screen, behind which was a gas-jet, giving
sufficient light for me to be able to discern every detail of the
drawing and painting of the figure. This was more apparent because the
studio in which I stood was in darkness, except for the brilliant light
_behind_ the easel upon which I was working.

It may be well to point out that the easel used for painting glass upon
is very different to the one in use by artists when painting on canvas,
as it consists of two rectangular wooden frames the front one of which
sustains the easel glass, upon which the various fragments of glass
forming the subject in hand are fastened, by means of a kind of cement
made of wax and resin. The frame immediately behind is covered with
white tissue paper, a material that not only diffuses the light equally
all over the subject which is being painted, but renders the otherwise
bright light soft to the artist’s eyes, and prevents the glare of the
various pieces of coloured glass from making them ache, as they would
do if a naked light were used. Thus, in painting a subject on canvas,
the light is thrown upon the front of the easel, but in painting a
figure for a church window the light is behind it, and passes through
it to show up the transparent colours.

I sipped my coffee and admired the monk, especially his eyes, which
appeared dark and lustrous and full of life, although his body was of
the lay-figure order, and his hands as absurdly grotesque in pose as
those of a Chinese mandarin on a tea-tray.

Then I turned my attention to the figure of St. Agnes upon my easel and
painted away again in a most diligent and vigorous manner.

Eleven o’clock came, and I began to grow sleepy and to give an
involuntary yawn now and again, but I had resolved to work till
midnight, and work I would.

Half-past, and I was becoming still more drowsy, and for some reason
a certain nervousness seemed to come over me--mental strain and long
hours I suppose; but presently I heard a sound as of glass lightly
jarring against some metallic or hard substance.

I glanced round and tapped my mahl-stick upon the floor, but no mouse
scurried away responsive to my sh--h--h! so I resumed work.

A little time elapsed, and again I heard the same rattle of glass; very
quiet, but quite distinct; it was a sharp, bright, but subdued noise,
familiar to my ear as the noise made by glass when touching another
hard substance.

Again I glanced round: all was silent. Only it seemed to me that the
glass monk solemnly returned my enquiring look with a gaze such as that
with which the Ancient Mariner fixed the wedding guest.

Work again--then another rattle, louder than before. This time I jumped
up from my seat, opened the door, thinking some one must be outside,
but nothing was to be seen. I looked again at my companion, Friar
Aylmer, and this time, to my astonishment, his eyes seemed to move--to
blink, in fact (for probably, as a religious man, he never learned the
art of winking). I approached, but the eyes were again fixed, fixed
full upon me, whichever way I turned. I simply laughed at myself: of
course I conjectured that the flickering gaslights in the adjoining
room were playing an optical prank upon me.

I sat down and seized my brushes, determined to finish the figure of
St. Agnes before I left; half-an-hour or so more and I should be ready
to trot homeward to bed.

As I sat before the easel quietly whistling to keep up my courage and
my spirits, the jingling of glass was once more heard, and this time
such a strange dread seized me that I was positively afraid to turn
my head. Then I heard a soft footfall, and my mahl-stick and brushes
dropped from my palsied hands, as my hair erected itself on my head,
the result of horrific terror.

Some one approached me--at my left side--and paused. I was simply
petrified with fright; turned to stone, body and limbs; only my brain
retained control of its natural functions.

I knew, although I could not look, that the painted monk stood at my
side!

A long pause, in which I could hear my heart beating audibly, and then
a fine, mellow voice at my elbow said--

“Good friend, why this fear? I am a man of peace, and would cause no
harm to the least of God’s creatures, much less to thee. Calm thy
perturbed spirit, and, prithee, let us converse for the short time
allotted me once in each century--one short hour!”

I calmed myself a little, and looked at my weird visitor. His
appearance was very natural, a man of flesh and blood apparently; and
he smiled benignly upon me as he toyed with the knotted ends which
dangled from the thick cord bound about his waist.

He sat upon a high stool, and my eyes were riveted upon him as if I
were being hypnotized by the strange visitor--indeed, so I was, for his
presence held me spellbound.

With soothing words he gradually calmed me, and after a long interval,
during which I several times unsuccessfully essayed to speak, I at last
found utterance, and inquired who my midnight visitor might be.

“My dear friend,” replied the dreaded shade, “listen, and I will tell
you about myself; then, perhaps, you may feel inclined to give me your
assistance.”

“Assistance? I? How can I assist a spirit, a phantasy? I beg you leave
me and return to your place in the window.”

“Listen,” said he, in a beautiful voice, which at once dispelled all
alarm from my mind; “listen, and you will soon discover how you can
be of service to me. I pray you do not interrupt, for remember I have
but one short hour in which to assume my earthly form, and if in that
time I cannot obtain mortal aid to release me from my leaden bonds, I
am doomed to resume my form of a painted monk in yon window for yet
another century. But _tempus fugit_, as the motto on the pedestal of
our old sundial used to inform us, and I will not lose another instant.

“I am Friar Aylmer--the label under my feet in the window is correct,
for I painted it myself, as indeed I did the whole window, and although
I wrought at it for six long years, it was destined at length to become
my prison, as you shall hear.

“I am not old, as you may judge from my appearance; although nearly
five centuries have rolled by since my birth, I am scarcely forty.”

I looked at his kindly features and bowed my assent to his assertion,
knowing that stained-glass figures do not grow old when once they are
permanently painted and burnt into the glass. He proceeded--

“My father, you must know, was Prior Aylmer, of St. Benet’s Abbey,
Norfolk; and by some means appeared to fall into the evil ways of the
sadly dissolute times in which he lived; at least he made one great
slip, one that he did not try to palliate in any way, but took so to
heart, that till the end of his days he lived an exemplary life, and
gained the love of all those who were under his sway in the great abbey.

“The monks used to notice that my father spent more time in the village
than was compatible with his monastic life, but then, as ecclesiastics
went in those days, he was a jolly fellow, and no one thought harm of
his frequent absence from the duties of the monastery, till one day an
event happened which set the whole brotherhood agog, and caused much
scandal.

“It was a simple, but very significant event; one so unusual, that
every one was taken by surprise, so that the whole place was in a
ferment of excitement.

“It happened that the porter was very late in taking down the great
bars which fastened the huge, heavy, oaken outer gate; so late indeed
that several of the brethren were about at the time, and when the door
swung open on its massive hinges, they saw just what the porter saw--a
long osier-work basket, with a thong of parchment upon it bearing the
words ‘For Father Aylmer.’

“The basket was quickly carried to the refectory and placed in the
great arm-chair of the Prior, to await the arrival of that worthy to
take his seat at the head of the table for the morning meal.

“It had rested there but a short time, when a noise was heard within
which caused a thrill to startle the slowly-assembling monks--it was
the cry of a baby!

“What was to be done?

“Who would open the lid?

“Should the Prior be called?

“Whatever was best to do? All these questions were cut short by the
entrance of the Prior himself.

“Every man was immediately silent; mouths were closed, but ears
and eyes were very wide open, and the question was in every one’s
mind--‘What will he do with it?’

“He quietly opened the lid, and before all the assembly raised a baby
form to view.

“That baby was myself!

“Before them all he blessed me, and in humble tones acknowledged his
sin, at the same time taking an oath upon the crucifix that, till the
grave closed over him, his tongue should not speak to woman more,
neither should his form be seen outside the Abbey walls.

“He lived thirty-five years after this startling event, but his oath he
kept inviolate, and, as I have already said, he led an exemplary life,
and died beloved and respected by all men, both lay and ecclesiastic.

“I was placed in the hands of a village dame to nurse, and she, kind
creature, had care of me till I was six years of age, when I was
received into the monastery, and under my father’s guidance instructed
in the various ecclesiastic accomplishments then in vogue.

“Wood-carving, missal-painting, and finally glass-painting were taught
me, and in them I soon became proficient. These things filled my time
when not studying the usual routine of religious education. As a child
I was a plaything for the monks, who delighted to hear me sing, some of
my efforts, I am sorry to say, being far from a religious nature, and
more fitted for an amorous cavalier than a budding monk.

“As I grew to man’s estate, my fondness for glass-painting asserted
itself; a fondness which enabled me, more than any other of my
accomplishments, to beautify the old Abbey, although some of
my wood-carving, for stall ends and misereres, was considered
exceptionally fine.

“As the years rolled on I filled the small aisle windows with stained
glass, and this so pleased the good Abbot, that he requested me to
paint the large east window of the Abbey church. I undertook the task,
but it took me several years to accomplish.

“Just before the window was completed, I had the sorrow of parting with
my dear father for ever. After a few days’ illness he succumbed to an
attack of fever, and was laid to rest in the burying-ground by the
Abbey wall. My grief was so poignant that for a long time I had not the
heart to finish the great east window, which now wanted but the figure
of another saint to complete it.

“One night, as I lay in my little cell, the thought came into my head
suddenly, ‘Why not paint a figure of my dear dead father to complete
the window?’

“I turned the idea over in my mind and could see no reason why it
should not be so, as for many years my father had been Prior of the
Abbey, second only to the great Abbot himself, and since my birth had
lead a truly pious life, an example to all those who received religious
instruction from his erudite brain.

“Full of love for my parent’s memory, I painted the figure of a monk
robed in the dress of our order, and from drawings I had made during my
father’s lifetime, I reproduced the features of his dear face as far as
possible.

“In due time the panel was fixed in its place and the great east window
was at last finished. A grand supper was given in honour of the event,
at which I was complimented upon my untiring energy and skill in
having enriched the Abbey church with such a splendid work of art. The
Abbot avowed it was second to none in the realm, but I was always a
modest man, and took his kind words as complimentary, but nothing more;
I knew he flattered me, and blushed accordingly.

“That night, when I retired to rest in my cell, I felt peculiarly heavy
and depressed; I ascribed the feeling, however, to reaction after the
excitement of the evening.

“I stepped into bed, but for a long time could not sleep. I simply
tossed and turned about till long past midnight, when, lying with my
face to the wall, I became aware of a light in the room. I looked
around but could see nothing, although the small cell appeared
unusually light, becoming indeed brighter and brighter, until near the
door the brilliance was so dazzling, that my eyes could not bear to
look upon it.

“I sat up on my humble wooden bedstead, and endeavoured to pierce the
effulgence, but instead I was forced to close my eyes, for the glare
was positively blinding. Then out of the radiance of glory came a
voice, which from its thrilling accents I knew belonged not to this
earth, and slowly, distinctly, and musically, uttered these words of
dreadful import--

“‘O gifted monk, thy skill is great, though thy veneration for holy
things but small; amongst Heaven’s saints thou hast presumed to place
one who, of this earth, was earthy, although doubtless dear to thee.
He whose portrait is shown in the east window--who is not of the
elect--shall stand in his vitreous form as a penance till _accident_
doth destroy his effigy. He shall know and hear all that passes around,
but except for _one hour in each century_, shall have neither movement
nor speech. _Accident_, not design, can alone cancel this dread
sentence. _Vale._’

“I sank back upon my bed trembling with fear, and pinching myself to
see if I was awake or dreaming; but I knew that I was awake, for the
light still illumined the room, although it grew fainter each moment;
till, in the space of perhaps a full minute, it died quite out; the
last portion to melt away being a circular aureole or nimbus, which
remained for some time after the larger blaze of light had disappeared.

“No sleep drew down my eyelids that long night, and in the morning I
was so ill that I could not rise for matins, and the good Abbot came to
my cell to ascertain the cause of my absence.

“‘Too much wine, my son, eh?’ he good-humouredly suggested.

“‘Nay, father, jest not, I pray, for I have a confession to make, if
you will bid my worthy brethren depart.’

“We were quickly left alone, and the door being closed, I related
to the Superior my vision of the night, at which his smiling face
gradually became sedate, and even stern, as he listened to my recital
of the strange apparition.

“‘My son, the long hours spent in study, and the work of painting our
great east window, have been too much for thy teeming brain; thou art
feverish, and require rest. Stay thou in bed for a day or two, and I
will forego thee thy duties. Rest patiently, my son, and be not over
thoughtful of the vision, which was probably but the hallucination of
an overwrought brain.’

“‘Nay, father, I need not rest, for the vision I last night saw was
no phantasy of a distraught or wearied brain, but a reality; and it
maddens me to think I may have doomed my father to a purgatory of
centuries. Holy father, will you grant me one request, a simple one
truly?’

“‘Ay, my son, that will I, for thou wilt not, I know, ask aught that I
may not in duty readily grant. What is it thou desirest?’

“‘Holy father, it is but a small thing. It is that I may be allowed to
take out my father’s portrait from the window and paint my own in its
place!’

“‘Hum! Well, well, if you think it will ease your mind you have my
dispensation to do it: one monk’s head is as good as another. I will
quietly give out before the brethren that as you are the painter of
the window, I should rather desire _your_ portrait there, instead
of that of your good father. At this thou must demur, though not so
pertinaciously but that I may override thy entreaties. This and more I
would gladly do for thee.’

“In due course my portrait replaced that of my father, and shortly
after I was taken ill with brain fever, and died on my thirty-ninth
birthday.

“I was placed in a grave by the side of my father, but alas! I did not
rest there; for when next day dawned, behold my soul and understanding
faculties had entered the painted monk, and there, in the east window,
for five centuries I have been cognizant of all things going on around
me, but with no power of speech or movement, except for one all too
brief hour every hundred years.

“In 1494 I came down from my window, and scared the brethren in the
dear old Abbey, who, crossing themselves, gabbled their Paters and
Aves, and conjured me to go back to my place in the window. I did so,
and then they put out all the candles, rushed from the church, and
locked the door behind them. Left alone, I had not long to reflect on
the awfulness of my position; but in a short time, dreadful as it may
appear, I determined to jump down from my lofty niche in the window,
and endeavour to kill myself, for I had only a _few more minutes to
live_!

“I ascended to my place beneath the canopy of the window, and, closing
my eyes, bent forward, and hurled myself heavily to the stone floor,
to try if I could break my neck, rather than live in death for another
hundred years.

“Down I fell--swiftly: but my impact with the floor was as if a feather
had been wafted down from the wing of some passing bird.

“I was foiled in my wicked attempt to avert my doom, and as I sat on
the encaustic pavement a fiend stood by me, who, with mocking laugh and
leering eye, whispered in a discordant voice in my ear--

“‘From the grid to the fire is but poor change; from thy doom up there,
to my cavern below, would not have availed thee much. I am disappointed
in not taking down a monk with me, for monks seldom lay violent hands
on themselves. But he! he! ha!--list to the rusty iron tongue of yon
bell; get thee to thy vigil; into thy niche; I may have thee yet. I
wish thee joy of thy hundred years. Be patient, good monk!’

“I was in my niche again ere the rolling boom of the great bell had
ceased to reverberate in the black vastness of night.

“1594 at length came, and this time I found myself in the east window
of St. F----’s Church, whither I had been transported soon after the
Reformation. Midnight crashed out from the great bell, and I was once
more free for one short, solitary hour--a mere speck in the revolution
of a whole century of time.

“This time I stepped from my niche rearward into the churchyard, and
made my way into the town, walking boldly into the High Street, without
an idea of what I was about to do, except that I wished to find the
vicar of the church in which I was incarcerated.

“I accosted two swaggering soldiers, and desired them to kindly tell me
where he lived, but they, being somewhat in liquor, looked at me and
then at each other, and laughed as if I had been some raree show.

“‘Come, comrade,’ said one, ‘we will show thee the vicar,’ and linking
their arms in mine they dragged me through the street to the Town Hall,
where, thrusting me before them, they forced me into the centre of a
group of boisterous soldiers, who opened out to receive me, evidently
thinking I was some Jack Pudding, masquerading in monk’s attire. They
bandied jests with me, and when I resented their rudeness, they only
laughed the louder, taking my remonstrance as part of my performance,
which they thought most excellent. Knowing my time was short, I became
so angry that they at length found a mistake had been made, and I
forced my way out of the throng, intending to find the vicar’s house by
myself, but, ere I reached the entrance door, I was hauled back into
the presence of the captain of the guard, who had just entered the
hall, and who leisurely proceeded to question me in a very rude and
imperious manner.

“I objected; and in turn became insolent to him, whereupon he
ordered me to be locked up till morning, that I might be haled before
the magistrate to give an account of myself. At this I saw my last
chance of finding the vicar gone, so, seizing a large sword that lay
on the table, I let drive at the nearest man to me, but he was too
quick for me, and guarded my blow, in turn aiming a blow at me which,
had I not parried, would have cut me in twain. I guarded the stroke
involuntarily, else might my life and penance have been severed at a
blow.

“Fool that I must have been: next instant I was flying through
space, and before I had time to draw a single breath I was again a
stained-glass figure.

“1693 gave me one more brief respite from my penance, but it was again
abortive, not bringing any kindly _accident_ for my release. I was
again revivified at midnight, a most inappropriate time, as you will
allow, for one to carry out any important business, such as the release
of a man from centuries of purgatory. During my weary imprisonment I
heard all the news of the period from the gossip of those who chose to
chatter just beneath me; I knew what king reigned, what battles were
fought; all the grand events that took place in England, and even all
the local scandal; but nothing I heard or saw gave me the slightest
interest. I was dumb but could hear; hear and understand all that was
said; but not a ray of hope ever came to me in the way of a plot to
blow up the church, although I heard many plots to demolish the State.

“Now and again an aimless stone struck one or other of the saints
around me and fractured him or her, but never a one gave me a kindly
blow, although my broad face and tonsured head gave a splendid target
at which a school urchin might have been pleased to try his skill; but
none ever did.

“On the night of my third revival a terrible storm was raging; the
lightning was flashing most vividly around the old church, and I
longed for a bolt to strike me; but I appeared to bear a charmed
existence, even in the flesh, for although I sat with my back to the
lightning-conductor which came down from the tower, not a spark of the
current touched me, although it toppled over the upper portion of the
spire, and hurled it in shivered atoms at my feet; not a stone from the
falling mass touched me, though I had designedly placed myself in the
way of danger. I sat on a gravestone and pondered what I should do, but
could think of nothing in the way of accident that could befriend me.

“As I sat thus, two soldiers passed by along the road, and one, on
perceiving me, stopped suddenly and clutched his comrade’s arm in
terror, pointing his finger tremblingly at me.

“They took me for a ghost.

“Here was my chance. If they would only fire at me, and kill me, I
should be absolved from my penance.

“They challenged me, but I answered never a word.

“Again they hailed.

“‘Who are you? speak, or we will fire.’

“I stood upon tiptoe and faced them, making a weird sound with my lips
that they might take me for something unearthly, and, if they had the
courage, fire upon me.

“One man raised his flintlock and fired deliberately at me, and the
bullet actually shore off a lock from my temple, which blew away among
the rank wet grass.

“He looked surprised as I gave a loud, hollow ‘ha! ha!’ as apparitions
and goblins are supposed to do; upon which he turned and fled, leaving
his more courageous comrade to face me alone. He was a noble, brave
fellow, and I blessed him as he knelt by the churchyard wall, upon the
top of which he rested his gun and took deliberate aim at my breast.

“My heart throbbed for joy as I awaited the releasing leaden missile;
but there was only a puff and a snap, and I knew that only a flash in
the pan had resulted when the soldier drew his trigger.

“‘Hang the damp powder!’ I heard him say; then in a louder tone--‘Hold,
old Hyter sprite! I’ll have at thee again; stay thee steady till I
prime afresh. I’ll see of what thou’rt made, and whether thou art foul
fiend in priestly guise, or some hair-brained loon who would scare an
old soldier who has fought the battles of his country these twenty
years.’

“Then, to my dismay, as he primed his weapon with dry powder the bell
rung out the hour of one, and I found myself amid the saints in the
window again. I saw the soldier go and examine the tomb on which I had
recently stood, and its surroundings, and then stride away after his
comrade, shaking his head, and I mentally blessed him.

“A hundred years ago--in 1793--I once more gained my life for the
allotted sixty minutes, and knew that in Paris the Revolution was at
its height. But what did that signify to me. St. F----’s Church was
not in Paris, or I might have been released unknowingly by one of the
dreadful bands of ruffians to whom nothing was sacred.

“I stood in the dark old church and pondered.

“What _should_ I do?

“_Where_ could I go?

“What could I _do_?

“Nothing, absolutely _nothing_! Stay; I would spend my time in fervent
prayer, kneeling before the cross on the Holy Table, and see if that
could release me from my awful doom.

“I knelt, and prayed, and wept, wringing my hands as the tears coursed
down my cheeks, like burning streams of molten lava; but as I thus
knelt at my devotions the vestry door of the church opened, and two men
entered, one of them bearing a lantern. They paused near the communion
rails, and one (by whose attire I judged him to be the vicar) said:

“‘Now, Giles, I may have dropped it here whilst performing the evening
service, and if so we should see the stone glitter by the light of the
lantern; let us look around the chancel.’

“The speaker had evidently lost a gem ring and was seeking it.

“Not knowing what to do I continued kneeling, to see what course events
might take. I had not long to wait, for a sudden shrill scream, a moan,
and a dull thud caused me to look round. Down the nave bounded the
man who bore the lantern, yelling lustily for help, and his companion
lay prone upon his face quite near me. I approached, bent over the
prostrate form, and turned the body over on its back--for body only it
was, the soul had fled. Happy man! he could die and be at rest, while
I, who courted death in any form, could only be--(Boom! the bell tolled
One)--a quaint, stiff, transparent figure of glass!

       *       *       *       *       *

“And now, my dear friend (for you _will_ befriend me if it is in your
power, I know, after hearing my awful story) I find myself in 1893 in
your studio, and to my horror hear that I am to be bound in fetters of
new leadwork: a new lease, as it were, of my penance!

“My time is short; what can you do for me?

“How can you destroy me?

“How _can_ a catastrophe be brought about without premeditation? How
can one _think_ without premeditation?

“My friend, save me! but five minutes remain. I cannot think, my brain
is on fire.

“My dear friend, think for me, I implore you!

“Oh! Heaven help me; do not extend my penance till the crack of doom!

“Watch the minutes gliding by--but two remain.

“I am going mad; mad! and you sit there dumb, who might, by an effort
of thought, be my saviour.

“_One_ minute; and then--purgatory for one hundred years!”

I looked at my guest and saw the great beads of perspiration chasing
each other down his temples; I saw his fingers writhing like serpents,
clutching at the empty air; I saw his eyes glaring upon me, and
piercing me through like two arrows; I saw him rise as if to fly at
me and strangle me, and recoiled with horror at the sight of him; but
he never came a step nearer for the bell of the neighbouring church
struck a big, reverberating _One!_ and as the corporeal figure of the
monk began quickly to dissolve into its glassy form, I sprang at it not
knowing what I did, and tried to grasp it, but my arms pierced through
it as if it were tissue paper, and I fell headlong upon the floor, with
a terrible pain in my forehead, and as I fell I distinctly heard the
words--“Joy and rest for ever; my doom is past! God in His mercy be
praised!”

       *       *       *       *       *

When I recovered consciousness it was 8.30 a.m., and a doctor and
my assistants were round me, using various restoratives. Across my
forehead was a terrible gash, which the doctor had sewn and bandaged,
and at the foot of the glass screen lay the broken fragments of my
visitor, the Monk.

       *       *       *       *       *

To show that it does not always do to rely on one’s own strength,
either physically or mentally, I may say that not only did I obtain
complete control over the will of my stained-glass artist friend,
but taking him at his word, I received from his unconscious self the
material for _several_ capital stories; and all this from the man who
could neither be hypnotized nor tell a single story! The overplus of
this glass-painter’s genius as a story-teller I reserve for future
consideration.




IX.

INTRODUCTION TO “DOCTOR ANGUS SINCLAIR.”


Wherever I happen to be, whether in town or at a seaport, the sight
of a genuine tar has a fascination for me, and I feel bound to speak
to the man, if he is at all a decent person and has a civil and clean
tongue. I find that the average sailor is a very reticent fellow on
first acquaintance, probably taking every landsman for a shark; and as
that is his belief, he is very wary of strangers who may wish to engage
him in conversation. No doubt, in ports all over the world, Jack meets
with plenty of unprincipled people, ready to take advantage of him in
any way that presents itself, and, knowing this, he is consequently on
his guard, and in time looks with doubt upon all strangers, as possible
enemies, sailing under false colours. Thus is Jack taciturn on first
acquaintanceship, both at home or abroad, but when once he finds that
he has a friend to deal with, his tongue is loosened and the bulkhead
of cautious reserve soon battered down, and he will then fire off his
jokes and yarns in a most amicable and boisterous manner.

Old John Beamish, whom I met in the port of Aberdeen, was one of
these peculiarly reserved men, carrying his character in his face, as
a stout, true, hard-headed North Briton; and it was only after several
friendly “cracks” that I could at all thaw the apparently austere
Captain Beamish.

The gallant skipper no doubt put me down as a bad lot, seeing that I
lived in a gipsy-van, and when I informed him that I only wandered
about for my own pleasure, tapped his short fat forefinger on his
nose, which I took to be a sign that my statement was somewhat open to
doubt. He could not conceive that any sane person, with a fair income,
should live on wheels, with no permanent address, when the said income
would provide “a nice snug little house, with a tidy bit of garden, a
summer-house, and a tall flagstaff, for its possessor.”

However, after I had persuaded the captain to pay me several visits,
he came to the conclusion that I might by some chance be speaking the
truth after all, and we had several pleasant evenings, which were
passed in chatting, cards, and whisky. Captain John loved cribbage very
much, but whisky more; and, on one or two occasions, I had to steady
him as he took his departure from my van, the step-ladder, or companion
as he called it, being very steep.

When I broached the subject of hypnotism the good man was unfeignedly
alarmed, and I fully believe placed my cards, whisky, and hospitality
down to a bad cause. I think he expected I had been luring him on to
rob him, or take some other advantage of him, and for several days I
could not prevail upon him to spend another evening with me, until I
informed him that I was to depart in a day or two. Then I invited him
to pay me a farewell visit. My invitation was accepted, and he came,
but I very soon noticed one thing, and that was, that he had left his
watch at home.

He played and drank as usual, and as the evening wore on he mellowed
under the influence of “mountain dew.” With each successive draught his
uneasiness gradually disappeared, until he became quite communicative;
and then--well then, feeling for all the world like a murderer--I added
him to the number of my victims.


DOCTOR ANGUS SINCLAIR.

I have--as seaman, mate, and skipper--in forty years seen some curious
sights, you may be sure, although all my voyages have been to the
north, ay, and pretty far north too, some of them; for we whalers have
to go wherever the fish are to be found, and if we cannot find them
near home, why, we have just got to go north and search till we do fall
in with them.

You want to know the most wonderful thing I ever came across in my
long life of hardship and adventure in the Arctic Seas? Well, there is
nothing that I know of to equal the finding of Doctor Angus Sinclair
in 1862. But as you want it spun properly I’ll give you the yarn from
beginning to end, and then you’ll see for yourself what a curious
adventure it was.

In 1862 I was mate of the _White Swan_ whaler, sailing from the port
of Dundee, and as we had made a very poor fishing during the previous
season in the Greenland Sea, our skipper made up his mind to try fresh
ground, and to steer north-eastward to the Spitzbergen Islands, as he
knew of some likely ground to the eastward of those islands.

The most eastern of the Spitzbergen Isles is one called Wyches,
or King Charles’s Island, and our skipper made straight for this
island, intending to build a hut there, and make it a kind of winter
habitation, should we be obliged to go into winter quarters before
getting a full cargo. Our owner had instructed the skipper to take
what oil he could get of the right sort, but, if he could not obtain a
full cargo, to wait till he could fill up with something else--by this
meaning seal-pelts, seal-oil, bear’s robes, walrus’ tusks or skin, or
anything else worth the freight.

Having all our outfit aboard we left Dundee, touched at Tromso, and in
a fortnight arrived safely at Wyches Island, where we stayed about a
week to build a large and comfortable hut, with timber brought with us
from Dundee. Holes were dug into the everlastingly frozen ground, and
posts erected, upon the outsides of which inch boards were nailed, and
afterwards upon the inside also. This formed a double skin, leaving
a space of some six inches between, which was filled with sawdust
tightly rammed down. The roof was made in the same way, and when it was
finished the whole of the interior was lined with thick felt.

There were four double-glazed windows facing the cardinal points, and
only one door facing south-west. This door was well draped in thick
blanketing to keep out the cold blasts of air. Bunks were ranged round
the walls, and a large stove for cooking and heating purposes stood
in the centre of the floor. Round the stove, forming three sides of a
square, stood deal tables, for dining and other purposes. Such was our
“Swan’s Nest,” as we christened it, and we afterwards found it very
cosy.

Between Spitzbergen and Franz Joseph Land we cruised during the summer
and autumn with fair success, but when the time came that we should for
safety be sailing southward and homeward, we found that our cargo was
not nearly a full one. Seeing this, the skipper had a grand “palaver”
on deck, in which he did nearly all the talking, and informed the crew
that he had decided to winter in White Swan Inlet; and finding that
one or two of the crew were for going home and returning in the early
spring, he gave them leave to do so, but also pointed out that if they
were mammy sick, and wished to go home, they would have to _walk_ there!

Our crew numbered forty hands all told, and a fine, jolly lot of
fellows they were, living very harmoniously together, splitting up
naturally into parties for fishing and shooting expeditions, when
the weather would allow of it. Some of these excursions were for the
benefit of our owner, as the skipper and I each headed parties to hunt
bears, and to knock over a few seals now and again. At other times the
parties were for the purpose of replenishing the larder, as we learnt
to snare white foxes, geese, and other things of a furry or feathered
nature; whatever we obtained went into the huge cauldron which always
stood on the stove, _à la_ the French _pot au feu_. By the way, our
stove was as carefully watched as any sacred lamp in a continental
cathedral, for it was never allowed to show even a symptom of going
out, either by night or day.

Sometimes we would organize little exploring parties on our own account
(having first obtained the skipper’s sanction), and wandered away for
miles among the hills of the frozen island, thus leaving more space for
those who remained at home to play their indoor games. Could any of
our friends have looked into the “Swan’s Nest,” they might easily have
mistaken it for a boys’ school, or even a play-ground. Let me just give
you an idea of what the inmates did to pass their time away, from notes
of the scene jotted in my pocket-book on one occasion.

Two men were cooking for the general mess. The armourer was cleaning
or repairing guns, knives, etc., for some projected expedition, while
round the fire sat a noisy group telling yarns and smoking. Near them
sat a party of four playing some game of cards; a desperate game
apparently, for they looked very solemn and absorbed. The boys were
enjoying a game of leap-frog at one end of the room, while several of
the bunks were occupied by men, some of whom were asleep, a couple on
the sick list, and others reading. There was a man, the cobbler of the
crew, mending boots, while at his side sat Snip, sewing away at the
seat of a pair of duffel trousers, what he calls armour-plating them;
and along the north side was a skittle alley, at which a knot of tars
are very much enjoying themselves, if we might judge by the shouts of
merriment and hearty smacks upon the back with which they salute each
other.

Hands behind his back by the stove, with his legs thrust apart like
a pair of compasses, stood the skipper, sipping a glass of something
steaming hot, while your humble servant had just finished posting up
the ship’s journal; for the skipper was a poor hand with the pen, his
fingers being all thumbs, and his thumbs like stun’sail booms.

Well, now that I have shown you how we amused ourselves, I will proceed
with my yarn.

Ever since I was quite a nipper I have had a fondness for exploring and
roaming about whenever I could get off duty, and this propensity did
not desert me amid the snow and ice of the Arctic regions, as you shall
hear.

I begged the skipper to allow me to make a tour of the island on which
we were living; a tour having for its object the making of an accurate
map; one, at any rate, more accurate than that at the time laid down in
the charts.

He met me with a flat and decided “No!”

“Why, man, are you mad? The island we are on is as large as the
principality of Wales, and to compass it you would have to travel at
least four hundred miles, which would probably mean an absence of nine
or ten weeks! No, my man, this is not _quite_ a lunatic asylum; not
yet, at all events.”

It was no use pleading, but his refusal set my back up, as the men
twitted me (not to my face, but indirectly), with wanting to be a
circumnavigator of the world on my own account.

Two of them would waddle round the tables, and, when they met, pretend
they had not seen each other for years, and shake hands and embrace
in a most enthusiastic manner, to the delight of the crew and my own
chagrin.

One day, the weather being clear, the skipper brought out his big
telescope, and was very busy with it, taking long surveys at a distant
island lying due south of the Inlet. He requested me to get the charts
of the Spitzbergen group down, which I did.

“Now look here,” said he, addressing me; “that island to the south’ard
is laid down in the chart as a mere rock, and only indicated by a big
dot and the words ‘rocks of some extent.’ Now, by my glass, it looks
a tidy big island, at least six or eight miles from east to west, and
goodness knows how long from north to south. I can see parts of it
which must rise to a height of several hundred feet, and probably the
whole island would take some three or four days to travel round on the
rough ice. Now what do you say to take two or three hands and go and
explore it?”

“What do I say?--why jump at it with pleasure, of course; but give me a
couple of days to get ready, and allow me to pick my crew.”

This was assented to, and in the three days allotted I rigged up one of
the small boats on runners, loaded it with felt sleeping-bags, a tent,
small stove, guns, provisions, a lamp, and many other things that might
be required.

On the third day I started off with four men, who were as eager for
the expedition as myself, being only too glad to undertake anything
for a change from the monotonous hut life. We were granted six days
to be away; if we had not returned by the end of that time a search
party would be sent out to seek us. We were instructed to plant a rod
with a piece of red bunting at our various halting-places, so that if
necessary our steps might easily be followed.

As we started off the whole ship’s company came out to bid us farewell,
and it made our hearts bound with joy and pride, when we heard their
voices, with loud “hurrahs,” make the surrounding icy peaks of these
Arctic solitudes echo again.

We had ten miles to scramble over the excessively rough ice which lay
between our winter quarters and the island. Six or eight of our mates
came half-way with us, to give us a hand in dragging our sledge-boat.

It was terrible hard work, and the first five miles took us six hours
to accomplish, as the ice was in some places piled in hummocks twenty
and even thirty feet high; round these we had to make a _détour_, so
that our course was very meandering and uncertain.

We made a halt and refreshed, each of us having a cup of hot coffee to
drink with the meal we had brought with us. We could see the “Swan’s
Nest” built on the side of a hill facing south-west, and, not a couple
of hundred yards away, was our vessel, the _White Swan_, frozen solidly
into the ice. Her topmasts and heavy gear had been sent down and stowed
on deck, which from stem to stern was covered in with a span roof of
timber; so that she looked something like a long black shed, with three
tall chimneys thrust through the roof.

After half-an-hour’s halt our comrades left us and returned to the
“Swan’s Nest,” hoping to see us again in six days at furthest.

After a long and rough scramble we at length reached the island,
and selecting a nook between two rocky cliffs, erected our tent and
prepared everything to pass the night there. The rocks on three sides
kept the wind off famously, what little there was, and to give some
protection from any bears who might be prowling about, we drew the
sledge across the narrow entrance to our nook; the stove we rigged up
at the mouth of the tent. We cooked a kind of stew, had a pannikin of
hot coffee each, and then, drawing sleeping-bags over our legs up to
our waists, sat and played cards by lantern light till we were ready
for slumber, when we drew the bags completely over our heads and slept
soundly till it was time to be up and stirring.

So far everything had been quiet and comfortable, but while we were
consuming our breakfast, one of the men named Adams went to the boat
for some more ship’s bread, and was in the act of taking it from the
bag in which it was kept when a huge white bear put his nose over
the side of the boat and opened its mouth, just as you see them in
menageries when a biscuit is about to be tossed to them. He appeared to
say,

“Don’t forget me, mate.”

Adams, far from being frightened, stooped and picked up an axe from
the floor of the boat, and swinging it aloft brought it down so as to
strike the animal fairly on the head, and had he succeeded he would
probably have killed it instantaneously, as he was a powerful man.

The bear was too quick for him, however, and dodged the intended blow,
so that the axe, instead of being buried in the furry one’s skull,
found a billet in the side of the boat, where it was wedged so tightly
by the force of the blow, that Adams could not withdraw it. He turned
round to jump out and run to us, but the bear, rising on its hind legs,
caught him a blow in the ribs which sent him with a crash into the
bottom of the boat.

The bear still stood on its hind legs, roaring and looking very
wicked--offering a capital mark for our rifles, three of which were
aimed at the monster at the same time. Two almost simultaneous reports
rang out, and the monster fell: my piece failed to go off--a bad cap I
found afterwards, for breechloaders were not then in general use. We
made a rush upon our fallen foe to give him the _coup de grâce_, but
the terrible fellow was quite dead, from a shot through the eye, which
had doubtless penetrated the brain. Two of his claws had been carried
away by the other bullet, which came very near missing altogether.

Adams lay in the bottom of the boat perfectly conscious, and looking at
us, but giving occasional groans.

“Are you hurt?” we asked.

“Hurt, mates? I’m afraid to move, for fear my whole starboard side is
stove in. Give us a hand, one of you; steady--gently now.”

He rose with difficulty, and we carried him to the tent and examined
his side. No bones were broken, but from the armpit to the waist was a
terrible bruise upon which we rubbed a good coat of the bear’s fat, on
the principle that like cures like.

Fearing that he would be an incumbrance to us, he determined to
start back to the “Swan’s Nest” alone, as he could not pull on the
sledge-ropes; so shouldering his rifle the plucky fellow returned
across the icy wilderness, and reached our quarters safely (as we
afterwards found), tired and sore in every limb, after a tramp and
clamber of twelve hours.

We skinned the bear, rolling up the robe and placing it in the boat,
and then commenced our tour of the island.

We had made the island on the north shore, and gradually worked round
along the east coast, till we arrived at the south, where we discovered
a nearly land-locked harbour of considerable extent, which we entered,
finding it covered with quite smooth ice, smooth enough, in fact,
for skating, which is a somewhat rare occurrence in these regions.
The Ancient Mariner had “water, water everywhere, but not a drop to
drink,” while in the far north we have ice and snow everywhere, but
not a place to skate. The harbour was surrounded by steep cliffs of
great height and snow-clad, but still a cosy-looking place for winter
quarters for a whaler.

As we looked around these wall-like cliffs, we were startled by the
sight of what appeared to be a solid-looking hut, built in a hollow,
over which the great brown cliffs lowered as if they would fall and
crush it. A steep, pathless, snowy slope led up to this strange
dwelling, which no sooner caught sight of than, like a lot of boys just
let out of school, we, with one accord, dropped our sledge-tugs and
bounded up the craggy acclivity to see what it contained.

Sure enough it _was_ a hut, and of fair size too, built with its rear
supported by the rocky cliffs, which had been hollowed out to receive
it. Two windows, heavily barred, looked out over the frozen sea below,
and between them was the heavy door, from a hole in which depended a
thin metal chain. I seized the chain and gave it a pull, which raised a
bar of wood within, causing the door to swing open of its own accord.

We looked within, but the interior was so dark that little was
visible, even with the door open; but we could see a piece of blanket
or battered sail stretched from side to side of the cabin, so as to
divide it into two apartments, and we could also discern a rough,
ancient-looking chair, and several large articles. I stepped in and
drew the curtain aside; I say _drew_ it aside, but it really fell apart
in my hand as I endeavoured to do so. Anyhow, enough of it was removed
for me to see a most gruesome sight; for there, in the dim light, I
could dimly discern the figure of a dead man, sitting by a table or
bench, and, as may be supposed, the sight made me recoil against my
comrades, whom I so imbued with my fright, that we all rushed out of
the hut together.

Telling them what I had seen, I sent one of them to the boat for the
lantern, so that we could obtain a light, and enter again into the
inner apartment of the hut.

The lantern being brought, we crowded in quietly together, I being
foremost with the light, and there, sure enough, sat a man at the
table in such an attitude that, had we not known he must be dead, we
should have thought he was simply asleep. He looked about sixty years
of age, and possessed very fine intellectual features; but on closer
examination we were surprised to find that his beard, instead of being
an ordinary one of, say, a few inches long, or even an extraordinary
one of a growth reaching to the waist, was of such an abnormal length
that it not only reached the floor, but lay there in a huge tangled
mass; nor was his hair a whit behind, as it fell in tresses over the
back of the chair, and was actually frozen to the floor all around him.
His eyebrows, too, hung down over his eyelids touching his cheeks,
and as for his finger-nails!--well, they were as long and pointed as
“the quills upon the back of the fretful porcupine.” His toe-nails had
pierced his shoes, and extended beyond his toes a foot or more.

We gazed in silence, being struck speechless with amazement at the
marvellous sight, and for some time our eyes were so riveted on the
strange object before us, that we forgot each other’s presence.

My voice first broke the silence, but as I spoke my words seemed a
kind of sacrilege to the presence and awful silence and solemnity of
the dead man before us.

“Well, mates, what do you make of this?” I asked.

No one knew what to make of it, but old Johnson, our carpenter, asked--

“What’s that thing on the table in front of him?”

I held the lantern closer, to what appeared to be a curiously-shaped
box; it was tall, and narrow, and of an octagonal form.

Drawing it towards me I raised the lid, for it was not locked, and
discovered another small case within it. This I also opened, and within
I found a roll of parchment, on which was clearly written in a bold
black lettering, the following words--

                                        “SOUTH ISLAND, SPITZBERGEN,
                                                     “_August 17, 1773_.

                     “_To whomsoever may find me._

  “I, Doctor Angus Sinclair, of Arbroath, Scotland, am the discoverer
  of a liquid which, injected into a vein, will suspend life for any
  length of time. I have chosen this spot in which to carry out an
  experiment to prove to the world that a person may sleep for any
  period he chooses; and by the aid of an antidote (which I have also
  discovered) may be awakened at any appointed time.

  “I wish to remain dormant for one hundred years or more, and should
  any one discover me before that time, let him kindly forbear to
  awaken me.

                  “_Directions to restore Animation._

  “Make an incision in a vein of my arm, and inject therein a few
  drops of the liquor in the blue bottle; in a few minutes I shall
  be restored to consciousness. A little hot drink of any kind will
  greatly facilitate my revival.”

When I finished reading the strange document, we looked at each other,
then at the doctor, and then at each other again, not quite knowing
what to do; but I presently sufficiently recovered from my surprise to
hold the lantern close to the old fellow’s face, when we were startled
to find that the colour still remained in his cheeks, and that the
body, instead of being frozen hard, was quite soft and fleshlike.

We lifted the old man from his chair, and tried to lay him out on the
floor, but his joints were so set fast that we could not straighten
them, so replaced him in his seat.

“Hold on, mates, let us see what the bottles are like,” I said, for I
could see the necks of three projecting from the box.

“Ah! here’s the blue one, and on it a label. Let us see what it says.
‘Liquor to restore Animation. Make an incision in the left arm and pour
in about six or eight drops.’ That’s the one we want, mates, but let us
see what the others contain. Here is a red bottle, and the label says,
‘Aid to Restoration. Infuse a teaspoonful in a gill of warm water, and
give the patient to drink.’”

Old Matt Johnson set about finding some bits of driftwood to make a
fire, for there was a stove in the cabin; while another ran to the boat
to procure some water and a saucepan.

A fire was soon started, and the water made hot: then came the
momentous question--

“Who will be surgeon?”

We doubted very much that the specifics in the bottles would have any
effect upon the old fellow, who could scarcely be expected to awaken to
life again after a sleep of ninety years. The document intimated that
one hundred years was the time the doctor wished to slumber, but we
thought ninety years quite long enough for a first trial; it would be
a record for the world, and beat the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus and Rip
Van Winkle hollow.

Before commencing to operate on our patient, we examined the other
bottle, which was labelled “Sleeping Draught. A. S., 1773. Dose, ten
drops with sugar.” This we replaced in the box, none of us wishing just
then to try its effects.

Johnson at last agreed to make the incision, or as he called it, “the
slot,” and taking out his jack-knife he whetted it on a piece of stone,
giving it a few rubs on his boot to take off the roughness, and then
proceeded to rip up the doctor’s coat-sleeve. It was one of those
tight-fitting lappeted coats, in vogue during the second half of the
last century, and quite in keeping with the date on the parchment--1773.

By the way, on scrutinizing the document once more, we discovered these
words written on the back--

  “At his own request I leave Dr. Sinclair on this island, and have
  promised to inform the harbour masters at whaling ports on the Scotch
  coast that he may be found on South Island if one of them will put in
  for him. He wishes to carry out several experiments of a scientific
  nature during the winter of 1772-73.

                                        “(Signed), CAPTAIN PHIPPS,
                               “Naval Surveyor to H.M. King George III.”

“Now, Chipps,” said I to old Johnson, “are you ready?”

“Aye, aye, sir,” said he, flourishing his knife, “ready and eager for
the fray. Where shall I stick him, sir?”

“Be careful, now,” I replied, “and make a little hole just there,” and
I pointed to a vein on the left forearm.

Johnson jabbed his knife in as if he were about to kill a pig: it made
a wound an inch long and an inch deep, but, strangely enough, no blood
flowed. With the aid of a piece off the stem of a tobacco pipe, I
injected a few drops of the liquid from the blue bottle, and with open
mouths and straining eyes we stood by to watch the result.

Several minutes went by without any apparent effect being noticeable
on the old doctor. We felt his pulse, or rather his wrist, for he was
as pulseless as the figurehead of a ship, and then tried his heart. We
endeavoured to open his mouth to pour in a few drops of the liquor from
the red bottle (which we had mixed with warm water), but his teeth were
so tightly clenched that we could not give him the “Aid to Restoration.”

As we gazed earnestly upon our patient we fancied we saw a movement of
his shaggy eyebrows, but put it down to the wind which found its way
into the cabin through the open door.

We watched again, and this time, to our great surprise, we saw a
twitching at the corners of the mouth, sufficient to cause a movement
of the heavy moustache.

I poured in three drops more from the blue bottle, and in a few minutes
saw the head of our patient slowly lift and fall back again on his
chest.

We tried his mouth again, and this time succeeded in opening his jaws
sufficiently wide to force a few drops of the warm liquid into his
throat.

Just then two of the men called out simultaneously that the wound in
his arm was bleeding. Sure enough such was the case, so, whipping
out my handkerchief, I bound up the gaping gash which our friend the
carpenter had made.

Slowly the old doctor regained his suspended animation and moved on his
chair, and when I raised his eyebrows, which hung down over his eyes
like the hair on the forehead of a Skye terrier, I found that his eyes
were partially open.

Quietly taking my knife from my pocket I gently cut off the long locks
of hair, so that the old man could see about him if he really did come
to, after his ninety years’ sleep.

He made me start as I shore off his second eyebrow, for he gave a
sudden shudder which caused him to tremble from top to toe.

Presently his eyes unclosed a little, and then a little more, till
they gradually opened to their widest extent; but no animation or
speculation was in them--they were the staring optics of a doll or a
corpse.

His hands next began to tremble, and we could see the life creeping
into his cramped limbs; and then his lips gave signs of movement. We
took the opportunity to give him the remainder of the liquid in the red
bottle mixed with water, and the effect was wonderful, for in about
half-a-minute the tall figure of Doctor Sinclair half rose, and like a
man suffering from delirium tremens, uttered the fierce exclamation of
“You rascal!” and fell back on the seat again.

We scuttled out of the cabin like a lot of frightened children,
jostling and falling over each other in our eagerness to escape from
the presence of the awful-looking being we had brought to life and
action.

After running some distance down the pathway or slope, we halted and
looked back, as if we expected the Ancient One to follow us, but as he
did not make his appearance we gradually and stealthily returned, and
emboldened by neither seeing nor hearing anything of the being within,
took courage to push the door of the cabin open.

We even went further and looked in, and there we saw the gaunt figure
of Doctor Sinclair with palzied hands trying to erect itself by the
friendly support of the massive oak table. His legs were so cramped,
and, as it were, rusty by his long trance, that he could not straighten
them properly, and so weak as to be nearly useless to support his
frame. He was a terrible-looking figure as he peered over the table
at us, with his grey beard and hair of unheard-of growth flowing down
before and behind him in unkempt profusion.

He moaned and mumbled; and then, with a great effort, tried to reach
us by concentrating his feeble energies and making a rush at us, but
his feet became entangled in his beard, his legs tottered, and down he
came, crash upon the hard floor, to all appearances dead.

Then our scattered senses returned to us, and being ashamed of
ourselves and our cowardice, we rushed to pick him up, and once more
to seat him upon his chair. A little brandy was administered, and
presently we had the satisfaction of seeing him regain consciousness.

The fire was replenished, and the doctor laid tenderly in his berth
and snugly covered up. We warmed some tinned soup, which refreshed him
marvellously; so much so that he found his voice, and quietly asked, to
our surprise--

“What year is it?”

“Eighteen hundred and sixty-two,” we replied.

“What king is reigning in England,” he asked.

“No king,” was my reply, “but a queen--Victoria.”

These answers seemed to satisfy him, for he smiled, and smiling fell
into a sound sleep.

“Well, here’s a rummy go,” quoth Chips.

To which we all replied that it was indeed a strange adventure, and
upon looking towards the old wooden cot one could hardly believe that
the tremendous mass of white seaweed-looking substance trailing from
the blanket to the floor, where it lay coiled like a heap of oakum, was
ever the growth of a human head; there it was, however, proof positive
before our astonished eyes.

Well, I must not spin my yarn out too long, or I may get it like the
old man’s hair--into a tangle.

We stayed at the hut two days, during which the old doctor appeared to
gather strength hourly; so much so that, with assistance, he could walk
several yards, and nearly straighten his legs and back.

We made him a comfortable couch in the sledge-boat, covering him with
the bear’s skin and a blanket, and all being in readiness we started
back northward to Swan Inlet, having abandoned all idea of completing
our survey of South Island, at least for the present.

We hoisted a large piece of red bunting at the prow of our sledge, and
when we had arrived within about four miles of our destination, we
could, with my binocular, discern little black figures leaving the
“Nest” and coming over the ice to assist us back.

We halted between two ice hummocks, got out our stoves, and prepared
a savoury meal of bear steaks and tinned soup, both of which, in such
intense cold, were exceedingly welcome.

By the time our repast was completed and we had again got under weigh,
the foremost of our comrades were nearly within hail. We soon rejoined
them, and were very glad of their assistance to help us to tug our
increased load over the rough hummocky ice.

We said not a word of our newly-found hairy man, for fear they might
want to see him, and thus cause him annoyance. We wished to drag the
sledge close to the shore, so that we could carry him right into the
cosy “Swan’s Nest” at once, and put him to bed.

As we proceeded over the frozen ice and neared home, other men kept
coming out to meet us, till all but about half-a-dozen of the whole
forty were tailing on to the ropes, and taking the sledge along at a
smart trot.

They could tell that there was some mystery attached to the
carefully-covered object in the stern, and it was useless for us to try
and put them off by saying it was only a heap of bear robes, for now
and again the object moved. They would have uncovered it to see what
was there, but I sternly forbade them to do so. Guesses of all kinds
were made as to what the mysterious heap consisted of, but although
many tried to unravel the secret not one succeeded. Some guessed young
bears, another a nest of foxes--others said seals, and one averred it
could be nothing but a young walrus, from its size and shape, but none
hit upon anything near the truth.

The inlet was reached at last, the sledge travelling over the smooth
ice of the haven at a great pace, but not before our gallant skipper
was ready on the beach to welcome me and my men back.

We shook hands, and I then told the men to stand back, as I had
something I wished to tell the captain. They stood away a few yards, in
a circle, so as to completely surround us and the sledge, as if they
were afraid it contained something that might escape. Hurriedly I told
the captain the principal points of our adventure. He was struck all of
a heap, as our American cousins say, and was at first disinclined to
credit my story of apparently superhuman return to life.

However, he quietly lifted the blanket, and looking at the uncanny
creature beneath, their eyes met. The captain started as if he had seen
a savage lion, but quickly regaining his equanimity, gave orders for
four hands to bring down a “barrow,” as the implement (which looks like
a bier) is called. Twenty hands started for the barrow, and in five
minutes the doctor was lying on it, while Chips and I walked behind
with his surplus beard and hair coiled in our hands, to prevent it from
trailing on the ground and throwing the bearers down.

The doctor was put to bed, well fed for two or three days, at the end
of which time he could stand, and even walk a short distance alone;
and within three weeks was able to form one of the members of our
shooting-parties, and although fifty-eight years of age, was as strong
and hearty a man as any of us.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spring at last came, and by July we had a full cargo; consequently,
on the last of that month, we steered south-west, homeward bound for
bonny Scotland and the relatives we had been parted from so long.

The doctor, of whom we had grown fond, was a very cheery companion,
and looked a strange figure as he walked about the deck, with his
carefully-combed and brushed hair and beard coiled neatly round his
waist, and usually fastened off with a bit of scarlet bunting.

The wildness of his hilarity seemed at times to point to an unhinged
mind, and as the good ship _White Swan_ neared her destination, he
became so excited that pronounced symptoms of madness appeared. These
symptoms increased so rapidly, that when within about five hundred
miles of Aberdeen, the poor doctor had to be locked in the captain’s
cabin. He refused all food, and when it was placed inside the door
instantly flung it into the sea from the stern windows.

“Only one more night and part of a day,” said the skipper, “and we
shall be in Aberdeen, if this breeze holds, when we will immediately
have a doctor on board to see to our poor friend and companion,
Sinclair.”

But it was not to be so; for next morning, when the captain went to the
cabin to ask the doctor how he fared, as was his custom several times
during the day, although he only got abuse for his pains, and even
threats of violence, he received no answer.

He knocked and knocked again without obtaining a reply, and mounting
the companion peered into the cabin through the skylight; but not a
trace of Doctor Sinclair was to be seen.

Finally the cabin door was burst open, and to the regret of all it was
found that the doctor had disappeared. There was no mystery about it,
for it was a clear case of self-destruction while of unsound mind: he
had leaped out of one of the stern windows and drowned himself.

On reaching port our yarn was soon spread abroad, but of course laughed
at by every one, as we had no proof that Doctor Angus Sinclair had ever
existed, except in our imagination. True, we had the three bottles
and the parchment, and these were in due time sent to the College of
Physicians in London, where they were analyzed and commented upon in
the medical journals.

What little remained of the “Suspender of Animation” was given to
rabbits and dogs, and it really had such a soporific power that they
could not be awakened, and, as long as they were kept in an atmosphere
below 25°, they remained without signs of decay, even for years after.

Unfortunately, we had used, in restoring the old doctor to animation,
all the contents of the blue bottle--three drops excepted. The
contents of the red bottle proved, on analysis, to be a concentrated
quintessence of brandy, which accounts for the doctor requiring it to
be mixed with hot water before being administered.

His idea was that animation might often be usefully suspended in
the case of persons out of work, on a voyage, or in embarrassed
circumstances; that many, who wished to skip over, as it were, a
few years of life,--either for the purpose of evading creditors, or
escaping the nagging tongue of a contentious wife--would welcome his
discovery and hail it, indeed, as the greatest of all possible boons.

Certain it is that had the doctor lived to patent his idea, he would
have completely revolutionized the social world. If our skipper had
only clapped on the “darbies” when he put the doctor in his cabin, we
might now be living in strangely-altered times.

Just pause and deliberate on what wonders might have happened, but for
the untimely madness and death of Doctor Angus Sinclair.

You, gentle reader, will probably come to the conclusion that my yarn
is like Heathen mythology--very fair reading, but without much to
recommend it in the way of truth.

If, however, you should require further proof of the authenticity of my
story, you have only to fit out a suitable yacht, sail for Spitzbergen,
hunt about for South Island, and having found it, you will probably
also find the hut just as I have described it, perched half-way up the
cliffs, in a bay (on the south of the island, mind you); and if you
enter the said hut and search on the shelf over the wooden berth, you
will find all that remains of Doctor Angus Sinclair; a relic that we in
our hurry left behind; a relic that will prove my yarn to be strictly
true, for the memento consists of the grand old doctor’s wonderful
eyebrows.

       *       *       *       *       *

Strange to say, amid the scores of stories which I heard in all parts
of England, but few of them were connected with ghosts, visions, or
apparitions, and from this paucity of tales of the supernatural, I have
come to the conclusion that the majority of such stories are somewhat
mythical and usually mere hearsay, not even second-hand versions of
something that has really happened, but stories told by the fireside
in the first place, and afterwards handed from mouth to mouth with
numerous additions and alterations to suit places and individuals,
until at length they become so changed and distorted that their
inventors would not recognize the offspring of their own imagination,
should they at any subsequent period listen to their recital.

Usually, after a story had been told, if I put the question, “Did you
see this?” the answer would be, “Oh, no; John Williams told me about
it, and I believe he heard it from Tom Smith.” A search for Tom Smith
would only result in the fact that he had heard it from Harry Jones,
etc., so that, strive as one might, the actual participator in the
gruesome adventure one wished to fathom could never be discovered.

One very cold December day I happened to be passing through North
Somersetshire, and whilst in the vicinity of Minehead, made the
acquaintance of a farmer who was also a blacksmith. My stove had broken
down, and one or two odd jobs of ironwork required to be done, so I
procured the services of my new acquaintance, and when the various
little repairs had been finished, invited him to share my evening meal,
and join me in a pipe and hand at cards.

He was nothing loath, and stayed. Of course my usual ghoulish thirst
for a story possessed me, and I endeavoured to obtain one from my
guest, but he affirmed that he could no more tell a story than I could
put him to sleep. Nothing memorable, he averred, had ever occurred
during his life, so how could he tell of what had never happened?

Then we fell to speaking of farming and crops, horses and fields, and
among other items he mentioned that his best crops were obtained from
the field in which my van was then located, called the Haunted Field.

“What,” thought I, “the haunted field! this must be seen into.”

And see into it I did, for five minutes later my guest was in a
hypnotic trance, and from his lips I gathered the following very
Christmassy story.




X.

THE PHANTOM RIDERS.


“Once upon a time” might fittingly be the initial words of this story,
for the terrible events of which it is a narration took place long,
long years ago; in fact, at the end of the seventeenth century.

To be precise, the day on which the stirring narrative commences was
December 23, 1695, two hundred years ago this very Christmas, but
heaven protect us from such a dreadful Christmastide as that.

The old Manor House at Minehead, in Somersetshire, no longer exists,
for the legends attached to it were of such a terrifying nature, that
no one dare rent it after the death of John Simmonds in 1696, so that
being uncared for, the old house lingered and decayed till it looked an
ideal picture of “desolation.”

Haunted or no, there was something so uncanny in the appearance of
the old gables, fast tottering to ruin, that even in the crepuscular
light of early evening, persons would hurry by it with a shudder,
while later at night, many would go a long way round rather than
pass its weather-worn walls. The very air that blew past the ruin
seemed to gather a deathly fragrance, which was doubtless due to the
fast-rotting timbers of the floors and ceilings.

Be that as it may, the evil repute of the old house grew so great, and
such dreadful stories were current concerning its sights and sounds,
that it was some years ago pulled down, the ground ploughed up, and
crops now flourish where, for generations, owls and bats held their
habitation undisturbed.

Minehead Manor House was an Elizabethan red-brick structure, with tall
twisted chimneys, curved gables, and dormer windows peeping out from
the red clay tiles. Its grounds were extensive, its gardens prim, and
its fish-pond well stocked with carp, eel, and pike; for John Simmonds,
the owner, was fond of wandering about and improving his domain. His
gardens and fish-pond were his hobbies, and so fully occupied his
entire time that he was seldom seen in the village, where he was
greatly respected and admired for his kindness to the poor, while his
grand old English appearance had all the stateliness of a typical
country squire.

He had an only daughter, Julia, an accomplished young lady as
accomplishments went in those days. She could sing and accompany
herself upon the spinet, could embroider beautifully, spin, and
generally comport herself as a young lady of twenty-three should, who
has a whole household on her shoulders.

Of lady friends she had few, and her gentlemen friends were even still
more scarce. One young gentleman, Wynne Clarge (a distant relative),
who lived near, assumed, probably because of the non-existence of any
rival, that he should some day claim her for his wife, but he was very
apathetic in the matter. There was little real _love_ between them;
they were passable friends, and that was all; he looked upon Julia as
he did upon his horse--they were both nice in their way, and ministered
to his wants; for the rest he took everything as a matter of course,
simply because he had no rival.

Things were running in their usual groove, when one day, early in
December, a gentleman was announced, who had called to pay his respects
to Mr. Simmonds.

It was soon explained that he was Charles Benwell, the son of Mr.
Simmonds’ sister, who had for many years resided in Virginia.

The cousins (for Charles was invited to stay at the Manor House for
a few weeks) fell in love with each other at first sight, and the
love was so sincere and intense, that ere three weeks had passed, Mr.
Simmonds was solicited for Julia’s hand.

“Quick work, my boy,” quoth the genial old man. “Why, you have scarcely
had time to know each other yet. It puts me in mind of Julius Cæsar,
does this visit of yours, ‘He came, he saw, he conquered,’ and so have
you, apparently. Well, well, we shall see. But you must not expect a
fat dowry with her, for she can sing, ‘My face is my fortune,’ like the
maid in the song; but still she will not be penniless--no, no! I will
see that she has a suitable maintenance.”

“As to that, Mr. Simmonds, you know I am over here for the purpose
of selling the property which my poor mother--your sister--has left
me. There are three estates of considerable size, amounting in the
aggregate to something like twelve hundred acres, besides several
houses, the documents appertaining to which I have left at the
solicitor’s at Dulverton.

“Now, Mr. Simmonds, tell me, have you any objection to my looking upon
your daughter as my affianced bride?”

Mr. Simmonds had no objection, but being a very cautious business man,
would like just a glance at the documents empowering Charles to sell
his late mother’s estates, simply as a matter of precaution, and to
ascertain if there were a flaw anywhere that might cause any delay in
the disposal of the property.

“As to that,” rapturously vociferated Benwell, “the papers shall be in
your hands by this time to-morrow, so that you may search them through,
and then on glorious Christmas Eve give your sanction and blessing to
our engagement.”

“Only fancy being engaged on Christmas Eve, Julia!” exclaimed Charles.
“How romantic! It is like the beginning of a story-book.”

       *       *       *       *       *

From the day of Benwell’s arrival, Wynne Clarge had roamed about the
house and grounds, snarling at every one and everything. He had treated
Julia very rudely, and one day suddenly asked her--

“What is that fellow dangling about after you for? I will not have it,
Julia.”

“But, Wynne,” his fair cousin replied, “it can surely be no business of
yours if he wishes to pay me attention; he is my cousin, and who knows
but he may make me a proposal before he leaves Minehead?”

All this was said coquettishly, but looking up at Wynne she was
frightened at the look of hatred she perceived on his face.

[Illustration: “His sword point, which was advanced towards the
spectators, was seen to be covered with blood.”--_p. 215._]

“A proposal he _may_ make, but your husband he shall never be while
I wear this by my side,” and he touched the hilt of his rapier
significantly, as he strode off down the garden path.

From that day he sought to quarrel with young Benwell, and his
relations with Mr. Simmonds became so strained, that the old gentleman
grew alarmed at his manner, and quietly but firmly forbade him the
house.

“It is not your house or lands I want,” exclaimed the irate Wynne; “but
hark ye, old man, Julia shall be my wife and no other’s; willy-nilly
she _shall_ be mine. I have waited for years, and will not be baulked
by this sallow-faced American loon! Let him have his holiday, and go as
he came, and leave Julia in my hands, or--I will know the reason why!”

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Christmas Eve, and Squire Simmonds had invited a few of the
neighbouring gentry to spend the evening sociably together under his
roof. Wynne had been invited with the rest, for at Christmastide the
squire could not be at variance with any man; but in the evening no
Wynne appeared. This gave rise to some little comments among the
guests, who good-naturedly twitted pretty Julia with having two strings
to her bow.

She blushed and bore it, only looking anxiously now and again at the
face of the old clock at the end of the dining-room, for it was past
the hour when Charley had promised he would return; for he had gone
over to Dulverton in the morning to fetch the required documents. He
had promised to be back by six o’clock, and it was now eight, and both
Julia and her father began to exchange glances of alarm.

At nine o’clock the guests also became anxious, and Mr. Simmonds tried
to persuade both himself and those present that all was right.

“You see, it is fifteen miles from here to Dulverton,” said Mr.
Simmonds. “Possibly he did not start till six o’clock; then he had to
make a _détour_, so as to call at Stoke Pero and deliver a message
to one of Julia’s friends, and that would make his homeward journey
eighteen or twenty miles, and thirty-five miles there and back is a
longish ride. Besides, his horse, Old Maggie, is none too good for a
long trot over this hilly country. Fill up, my friends! Here’s to our
future squire, Charles Benwell!”

He raised the goblet to his lips, but had not commenced to quaff, when
looking towards the door, he saw the absent Charley advancing toward
the table, looking extremely pale. All in the room rose in greeting,
but he turned from them, and unbuckling the clasp of his riding-cloak,
walked to an alcove, formerly an immense fire-place, but now used as a
closet for hanging outdoor coats, wraps, and accoutrements, a curtain
being drawn across it.

To their surprise, every one present noticed, as he turned, that his
deep white collar (which was the fashion of those days) was saturated
with blood, and as they noted this, and had the words on their lips to
speak to him about it, he disappeared into the alcove by walking, as it
seemed, _right through the curtain_, and not drawing it aside in the
usual way!

The assembled guests stood aghast.

What could it mean?

For a long time not a man stirred. But at length the spell was broken
by a young fellow named William Rayner advancing to the curtain sword
in hand: he snatched it suddenly aside.

_The recess was empty!_

Charles Benwell had apparently vanished through the solid wall!

The curtain fell from Rayner’s grasp as he stood immovable with
amazement. Then came another long pause; a consultation; a
replenishment of glasses; and finally the conclusion was arrived at
that it was the apparition of Julia’s lover they had seen.

Fear now settled on them all, and as they sat, talking in hushed tones
and glancing nervously about, the curtain guarding the alcove was seen
to move.

It bulged out slightly as if caught by a draught of air, and then again
its long, sombre folds trailed upon the floor and were still again.

No one moved from the spot where he happened to be sitting or standing,
but all eyes were fixed in horror on the agitated tapestry.

_Again it swayed._

This time the bold Will Rayner rose, and drawing his sword, was joined
by some of the others, also sword in hand. Rapidly they advanced across
the intervening space, and Rayner, plucking hold of the fabric with his
left hand, drew it aside with a quick jerk.

Wonder of wonders, in place of the white-faced Benwell there stood his
scowling rival, Wynne Clarge.

His right wrist was bared, and his sword point, which was advanced
towards the spectators, was seen to be covered with blood.

As they looked with startled eyes, the blood slowly dripped to the
floor, drip--drip--drip!

“How now, Master Clarge, think you to frighten us with such
tomfoolery?” exclaimed Will Rayner. “Get thee gone with thy mummery, or
my sword shall teach thee a lesson not to make fools of thy betters.”

Then, rushing forward, he attempted to beat the sword out of Wynne’s
hand with his own, but to his amazement no clang of steel sounded as
their weapons met.

“Here’s at thee, Wynne,” cried the now enraged man; and suiting the
action to the word, he made a deadly thrust at his opponent’s breast:
the blade pierced the figure without any resistance, and struck the
wall so violently that it was knocked out of his hand and rolled
clattering on the floor.

At the attack and thrust Wynne looked straight at his assailant, smiled
sardonically, and--_slowly melted away_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The guests stayed all night, sleeping where they best could, at least
those whose eyelids had the power to close; while the more nervous
scarce dare move from the room for fear of encountering one or other of
their ghostly visitors.

It was useless trying to search the wild country between Minehead and
Dulverton while it was yet dark, but with the first grey light of a
dull morning--Christmas Day--a party of eight gentlemen rode off in
search of the missing Charles Benwell.

Through Selworthy they silently rode, and turning to the left entered
the lovely woods of Korner. Hills rose to a great height on either side
of the valley up which they travelled; hills that seemed to touch--aye,
and really did touch--the low-lying dun-coloured snow-clouds. There
was a rough kind of path, which ran beside the brook--now swollen to a
mountain torrent--but at best it was a mere cattle track, and was now
fast becoming obliterated by the silently falling snow.

The men rode on, scarcely speaking a word; the only sound that was
heard was the roar of the turbulent torrent as it tore through its
rocky bed on its way to the sea at Porlock.

Presently they heard a horse neigh, and making at once towards the
sound, quickly found poor Old Maggie grazing at the foot of Dunkery
Beacon near the village of Stoke Pero.

The snow was now falling so fast that not the sharpest eye could
perceive the summit of the Beacon, which towered sixteen hundred feet
above them.

“Coup! coup! Maggie,” coaxingly cried Will Rayner, and the mare,
whinnying, trotted to him. She was still saddled, and they found, as
they feared to find, both upon the saddle and back, stains of blood.

“Follow up, friends,” said Will, “as rapidly as possible, for if I
mistake not, our poor friend lies not far away, and if we make not the
best of our way, the snow may hide from us that which we seek.”

They accordingly travelled on much quicker, and as they turned to cross
the rustic bridge, at the foot of the hill from which Stoke Pero looks
dreamily down, they found poor Benwell, lying on his face, dead, frozen
stark and stiff, and partly covered with snow as with a winding-sheet.

They dismounted, and examined the murdered man, discovering to their
amazement and horror that he had been run through the base of the neck
from _behind_, by some cowardly hand.

The body was laid over the back of a horse, and four of the gentlemen
returned with it to the Manor House, while Will and the other three
friends prosecuted their search for Wynne Clarge.

This search, however, was in vain; no signs of him could be found, and
after wandering about in the snow for a long time they returned to
Minehead.

It was indeed a sad Christmas Day for the good folks of the Manor
House, which instead of being a place of rejoicing was now a house of
the deepest sorrow.

Poor Julia was inconsolable.

No papers relating to the property were found on the body, and this
gave some clue to Wynne’s reason for waylaying the poor young fellow.

Benwell was buried in the churchyard which lies high upon the hill, a
churchyard surrounded by walls that look out over the quiet town like
the ramparts of a fortress dominating a city.

A week later, a great commotion was caused by the news being brought,
that Wynne’s body had been discovered in the trout pool, which lies
nearly hidden under the great hill near Stoke Pero.

True it was, and for him too--murderer as well as murdered--a
resting-place was found in the quiet hill-top churchyard.

       *       *       *       *       *

The missing papers could not be discovered, although the woods had been
searched in all directions, and as the unusually cold winter gave place
to the genial early spring, people began to look upon the tragedy as a
thing of the past, and talked no more of it.

Poor Julia drooped and faded; but with the advent of the lovely warm
May days she revived, and, by and by, became her own sweet self again;
not quite so tuneful in her songs as of yore, but still her father’s
own little warbling bird, for he delighted in music and in singing,
particularly the songs his daughter sang to him of an evening.

Summer came with its flowers, and autumn with its grain and fruit, and
then--then came cold dreary winter once more.

Christmas approached, but this year, instead of the usual jovial party
at the Manor House, Julia and her father accepted an invitation to
spend a few days with the sporting rector of Stoke Pero. They arrived
at the Rectory on the 22nd of December (a Monday), and were invited to
stay over Christmas Day, which was on the Thursday.

Julia was not at all in good spirits, and was evidently thinking of the
dreadful Christmas a year ago and her lost love. She brooded so that,
as Christmas Eve approached, she was positively unable to hide her
state of intense nervousness and melancholy, and at noon on the 24th
she felt herself so unwell that she implored her father to take her
home.

Mr. Simmonds and the worthy parson took counsel together, and as Julia
appeared in a high state of nervous excitement bordering on fever, they
gave her a sleeping draught, placing her in the chimney corner in the
Rector’s great arm-chair. There she slept for three hours, but when she
awoke, again implored her father to take her home, as she felt so ill
and did not wish to give her kind hosts trouble.

There was no resisting this second appeal, so after a little delay
in getting ready, they mounted their horses, and with a boy riding a
pony and carrying a lantern in advance, they set off on their journey
homeward.

The snow lay thick on hill and tree, and they made but slow progress.
The lantern gave but little light; it bobbed about hither and thither
like an _ignis fatuus_, and finally the boy’s pony stumbled, and boy,
pony, and lantern were buried in a deep snow-drift. The boy scrambled
out quickly, but by the squire’s orders did not light his lantern
again. They crossed the bridge and picked their uncertain way along the
snow-covered path by the torrent’s brink.

Suddenly the squire drew rein as a man rode quickly and silently past
them, over the snow, going in the same direction as themselves.

“How like Old Maggie,” said the squire half aloud; “and if I did not
know to the contrary, I could have sworn that the rider was poor
Benwell!”

The squire supported Julia with his left arm as she rode by his side,
cheering her as best he could.

“Who was that, father?” she asked. “How strange he did not speak as he
passed us by.”

“It was indeed, my dear,” he rejoined; “but probably he was a stranger,
and unaccustomed to our hearty West Country greetings. But see, he has
stopped and dismounted.”

They beheld him in the moonlight standing by his horse’s side, but for
some reason the squire’s horse and his daughter’s both stopped of their
own accord, while the boy’s pony wheeled round and dashed back towards
Stoke.

The strange horseman patted his steed’s neck, tightened the
saddle-girth, and was about to remount, when another man suddenly
bounded forward, with a drawn sword, and making a lunge at the
unfortunate traveller, thrust him, from behind, right through the neck.

Then the murderer searched the dying man, taking a large bundle of
papers from the saddle-bags, and transferring them to his own pockets.

Turning once more to his victim, who was not dead, but feebly
struggling in the snow to regain his feet, he again stabbed him, this
time clean through the heart. Then, with a malignant smile he turned
away, strode to his own horse, which was tethered to a tree hard by,
mounted, and in a trice galloped close past the spellbound onlookers.

As he galloped silently by, the squire beheld, to his astonishment, the
features of Wynne Clarge!

Thus was re-enacted, in phantom-vision, the murder of Charles Benwell,
as it took place twelve months before.

Trembling in every limb Mr. Simmonds turned to his daughter. But Julia
was no more, _his arm encircled her lifeless clay_.

       *       *       *       *       *

An old man and feeble was John Simmonds, when, two months after the
above events, he left his bed, slowly recovering from brain fever; but
although he was able occasionally to wander listlessly in his garden
in the warm days of the summer, he lingered only till the first days
of autumn tinged the foliage with gold and red, then drooped like the
flowers, and like the flowers he died.

By his daughter’s side, upon that hillside in the west, the old man
sleeps, and to this day their tombs are pointed out; the one known as
“the Good Squire’s Tomb,” and the other is called “Julia’s Grave.”

       *       *       *       *       *

When the next Christmas Eve came round, bold Will Rayner organized a
little party to watch the spot where the murder took place. They did
not keep their dread vigil in vain, for a little after darkness set
in they all saw the phantom horseman ride up, dismount to tighten
his saddle-girth, and pat his tired horse on the neck. They saw the
dastardly rush of his rival: they saw the deed enacted before their
eyes, as Mr. Simmonds and Julia had seen it in a marvellous manner, and
Will had difficulty in restraining his comrades from rushing upon the
murderous Wynne, although they knew him to be but the phantasm of a man.

Their purpose, however, in watching was to _follow_ the ghost, and as
it mounted its shadowy horse they all gave chase.

It was a wild sight to see these young men following the apparition,
who pursued his course through the wild woods apparently unconscious
that he was being followed.

For three miles he rode, and then drew rein by a low cliff which
overhung the stream. He dismounted, took the bundle of papers from
under his cloak, and hid them beneath the stump of a tree, whose roots
flung themselves in fantastic shapes from the side of the cliff. Then
he mounted his horse again, with a smile of triumph on his ghastly
face, rode up the precipitous bank, and had nearly gained the brink,
when his horse missed its footing, rolled over backwards with its
rider, and both disappeared into the turbid water below.

The ghostly horse quickly emerged and galloped away, but the shade of
Wynne Clarge, its rider, rose no more.

A search was made in the low cliff for the missing documents relating
to the Benwell estate, and they were easily found; but having lain
in a damp cavity impregnated with lime for two years, they fell to
pieces as Rayner grasped them, and all that remained in his hand was an
undecipherable pulp.




CONCLUSION.


The Wise and Foolish Virgins among them carried ten lamps; and
strangely enough, that number coincides with the number of stories in
this volume. In five lamps no oil was poured, so that the lamps gave
forth no light, but the remaining lamps were well filled and shed forth
light on all around. Such may, I trust, be the case with my stories;
some of them may to my readers appear dull and uninteresting, but in
the remaining moiety I trust some gleams of pleasure may be found,
which, if not shedding forth the electric rays of a Poe, may yet give
forth enough intellectual light to cause the writer to be seen and
appreciated by the public as one who has not wholly failed to use his
pen to the pleasure of his indulgent readers.

Probably my penchant for listening to stories wrung from unwilling
guests is highly reprehensible; but I am sorry to say that my hobby has
quite taken the bit between its teeth, and, instead of my riding and
controlling, it has mastered me.

Some of my friends, probably my truest friends, prophesy, and I must
say with some grounds for their forecasts, that I stand a good chance
of seeing the interior of a gaol--my crime that of divulging the
secrets of persons whose brains I have used as a kind of mental sponge.
These good friends regard me as an ogre, prowling over the country on
wheels, and robbing those to whom I have given sanctuary and shown
hospitality in my humble caravan home.

Probably they are right; but why in these days of dearth of original
and uncommon stories, should persons be allowed to carry such
interesting narratives about with them in a dog-in-the-manger style,
when by the exercise of a little ingenuity I am able to obtain their
hoarded narratives, and use them for the public good? Surely the end
justifies the means, from a literary point of view.

The hypnotic seizure of tales untold is a simple art, and if any of
my readers (those having secret family skeletons preferred) will call
upon me, I will with pleasure show them how to hunt for a story. The
hunter and the quarry only are needed; noisy hounds to worry the poor
quarry are not required, the hunter does it all quietly and effectively
by himself, just as that watchful assassin, the spider, interviews the
interesting and toothsome fly.


THE END.


  _Jarrod & Sons, Printers, Norwich, Yarmouth, and London._




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Perceived typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY HUNTER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Alpine flora of the Canadian Rocky Mountains
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Alpine flora of the Canadian Rocky Mountains

Author: Stewardson Brown

Illustrator: Mary Schäffer Warren

Release date: August 2, 2025 [eBook #76618]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1907

Credits: Steve Mattern and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALPINE FLORA OF THE CANADIAN ROCKY MOUNTAINS ***





Transcriber’s Notes:

  Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
    in the original text.
  Equal signs “=” before and after a word or phrase indicate =bold=
    in the original text.
  Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
  Illustrations have been moved so they do not break up paragraphs.
  Typographical and punctuation errors have been silently corrected.
  The scale factor for the illustrations has been included in file,
    however this will be meaningless in an ebook since we have no
    control over how big the displayed image will be.




[Illustration: Mimulus Lewisii Pursh. (⅔ Nat.) Red Monkey-Flower.]




                         Alpine Flora
                            of the
                   Canadian Rocky Mountains

                              By
                       Stewardson Brown

       Curator of Herbarium Academy of Natural Sciences
                         Philadelphia

    Illustrated with Water-Colour Drawings and Photographs
                              By
                     Mrs. Charles Schäffer

                      G. P. Putnam’s Sons
                      New York and London
                    The Knickerbocker Press
                             1907

                        COPYRIGHT, 1907
                              BY
                      G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS

               OFFERED TO THE LOVERS OF ALPINE
               FLORÆ IN THE MEMORY OF DR. CHARLES
               SCHÄFFER OF PHILADELPHIA, WHO WAS
               AMONG THE PIONEER BOTANISTS OF THE
               CANADIAN ROCKIES, AND WHO EARLY
               RECOGNISED THIS REGION AS A NEW
               AND INTERESTING FIELD FOR STUDY




PREFACE


The present volume, though prepared in manual form, is meant only as
a guide to the rich and interesting flora of the Canadian Rockies and
Selkirks or those portions traversed by the Canadian Pacific Railway
between Banff and Glacier. While many of the plants herein described
are found throughout the entire region, yet the species characteristic
of the two mountain ranges are vastly different. For the most part
those of the Rockies might be characterised as plants adapted to
the withstanding of severe conditions of drouth and cold, being
mostly low and tufted, with small surfaces of leaf exposure, either
thick and leathery or in many instances with an ample covering of
protecting hairs; while those of the Selkirks, owing to the more humid
atmospheric conditions, are essentially moisture-loving forms, with a
luxuriant growth of stems and leaves; it is only where the conditions
are similar in the two regions that we find the same or similar forms
existing. Few of the more characteristic Rocky Mountain species extend
west of the divide, while of those of the Selkirks, few extend east
of it, except where there is a luxuriant forest growth, with the
consequent retention of moisture, and then only at altitudes of from
2000 to 3000 feet greater.

Contrasting the plants of this region with those of the European Alps
it is interesting to note, that while the species are for the most
part vastly different, yet there is a certain close resemblance in the
families and genera which are represented; the Anemones are here, but
not in the scarlets and crimsons, running more to whites and purples,
and so are the Buttercups, dwarf many of them, but with large, showy
flowers; the Saxifrages and Drabas are innumerable as are the Vetches
and also the Heaths, but the latter with fewer and very different
species. Some plants, however, like the White Mountain Avens (_Dryas
octopetala_), the Butterwort (_Pinguicula vulgaris_), the Moss Campion
(_Silene acaulis_), the Mountain Cranberry (_Vitis-idæa_) and the
Low Cranberry (_Oxycoccus_), the One-flowered Wintergreen (_Moneses
uniflora_), the Forget-me-not (_Myosotis alpestris_) and others are
found on both sides of the Atlantic, yet we have no such array of
Primroses or Gentians as our European brothers, though both genera are
represented with us, while on the other hand they can boast of nothing
comparable to our Indian Paint-Brush, found throughout the region on
the river shores and bars during late June and early July and later
through the summer in its innumerable forms and colours in the moist
alpine meadows and slopes.

The ferns and their allies with the more striking of the trees and
shrubs have been included in the present work, together with the
majority of the herbaceous flowering plants, though some of the largely
represented but less striking groups such as the Grasses, Sedges,
and Willows have been entirely omitted, not seeming of sufficient
general interest to warrant the space required for their intelligent
treatment. The species are arranged in accordance with their scientific
relationships, with keys to the genera and a general key to the
families. Among the illustrations herein contained, many of the plants
of the Northwest are figured for the first time.

Acknowledgment is here made to Messrs. David McNicoll, Robert Kerr, and
other officials and employees of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company
through whose courtesy was made possible the gathering of the data for
the basis of this work.

                                                              S. B.

    ACADEMY OF NATURAL SCIENCES,
        PHILADELPHIA, October 28, 1907.




CONTENTS


                                         PAGE
    PREFACE                                v
    GLOSSARY                             xxv
    GENERAL KEY TO THE FAMILIES       xxxiii
    ADDER’S-TONGUE FAMILY                  1
    FERN FAMILY                            3
    HORSETAIL FAMILY                      14
    CLUB-MOSS FAMILY                      18
    SELAGINELLA FAMILY                    22
    PINE FAMILY                           23
    YEW FAMILY                            34
    ARUM FAMILY                           35
    BUNCH-FLOWER FAMILY                   36
    LILY FAMILY                           41
    LILY-OF-THE-VALLEY FAMILY             45
    IRIS FAMILY                           52
    ORCHID FAMILY                         53
    WILLOW FAMILY                         68
    BIRCH FAMILY                          70
    MISTLETOE FAMILY                      72
    SANDALWOOD FAMILY                     73
    BUCKWHEAT FAMILY                      75
    PURSLANE FAMILY                       80
    PINK FAMILY                           81
    CROWFOOT FAMILY                       90
    BARBERRY FAMILY                      109
    POPPY FAMILY                         110
    MUSTARD FAMILY                       111
    STONE-CROP FAMILY                    125
    GRASS-OF-PARNASSUS FAMILY            126
    SAXIFRAGE FAMILY                     128
    GOOSEBERRY FAMILY                    146
    ROSE FAMILY                          150
    APPLE FAMILY                         165
    PLUM FAMILY                          167
    PEA FAMILY                           168
    FLAX FAMILY                          182
    CROWBERRY FAMILY                     183
    STAFF-TREE FAMILY                    184
    MAPLE FAMILY                         185
    ST. JOHN’S-WORT FAMILY               186
    VIOLET FAMILY                        187
    OLEASTER FAMILY                      191
    EVENING PRIMROSE FAMILY              193
    GINSENG FAMILY                       199
    CELERY FAMILY                        201
    DOGWOOD FAMILY                       205
    WINTERGREEN FAMILY                   207
    HEATH FAMILY                         211
    HUCKLEBERRY FAMILY                   220
    PRIMROSE FAMILY                      226
    GENTIAN FAMILY                       231
    BUCKBEAN FAMILY                      236
    DOGBANE FAMILY                       237
    WATER-LEAF FAMILY                    238
    BORAGE FAMILY                        240
    MINT FAMILY                          244
    FIGWORT FAMILY                       248
    BUTTERWORT FAMILY                    262
    MADDER FAMILY                        263
    HONEYSUCKLE FAMILY                   264
    VALERIAN FAMILY                      271
    BELLFLOWER FAMILY                    273
    CHICORY FAMILY                       275
    THISTLE FAMILY                       283
    INDEX                                323




ILLUSTRATIONS


   PLATE                                                     FACING PAGE

        Mimulus Lewisii Pursh. _Red Monkey-Flower_        _Frontispiece_

     1 Pinus albicaulis Engelm. _White Pine_                          24
     1 Pinus Murrayana Oreg. Com. _Jack Pine_                         24

     2 Larix Lyallii Parl. _Lyall’s Larch_                            26
     2 Thuja plicata Don. _Giant Cedar_                               26

     3 Abies lasiocarpa (Hook) Nutt. _Balsam Fir_                     28
     3 Pseudotsuga mucronata (Raf.) Sudw. _Douglas Fir_               28

     4 Tsuga Mertensiana (Bong.) Carr. _Mountain Hemlock_             30
     4 Tsuga heterophylla (Raf.) Sarg. _Hemlock_                      30

     5 Picea albertiana. S. Brown. _Alberta Spruce_                   32
     5 Picea albertiana. S. Brown. _Alberta Spruce_                   32

     6 Zygadenus elegans Pursh. _Tall Zygadenus_                      38
     6 Zygadenus gramineus Rydb. _Zygadenus_                          38

     7 Stenanthella occidentalis (A. Gray). Rydb. _Stenanthium_       40
     7 Clintonia uniflora Kunth. _Clintonia_                          40

     8 Tofieldia intermedia Rydb. _False Asphodel_                    42
     8 Vagnera stellata (L) Morong. _Star-Flowered Solomon’s Seal_    42

     9 Erythronium grandiflorum. Pursh. _Snow Lily_                   44

     10 Lilium montanum A. Nels. _Red Mountain-Lily_                  46
     10 Kruhsea streptopoides (Ledeb) Kearney. _Kruhsea_              46

     11 Cypripedium passerinum Rich. _Small White Lady’s Slipper_     54
     11 Cypripedium parviflorum Salisb. _Small Yellow Lady’s Slipper_ 54

     12 Corallorhiza Corallorhiza (L). Karst. _Coral-Root_            56
     12 Lyschiton kamtschatcense (L.) Schott. _Western Skunk-Cabbage_ 56

     13 Cytherea bulbosa (L.) House. _Calypso_                        58
     13 Orchis rotundifolia Pursh. _Small Round-Leaved Orchid_        58

     14 Limnorchis dilatatiformis Rydb. _Purplish-Green Bog-Orchid_   62
     14 Peramium Menziesii (Lindl.) Morong. _Menzies’ Rattlesnake
         Plantain_                                                    62

     15 Ophrys borealis (Morong). _Northern Twayblade_                64
     15 Ophrys nephrophylla Rydb. _Heart-Shaped Twayblade_            64
     15 Cœloglossum bracteatum (Willd) Parl. _Long-Bracted Orchid_    64
     15 Limnorchis fragrans Rydb. _Fragrant White Bog-Orchid_         64
     15 Lysiella obtusata (Pursh) Rydb. _Small Northern Bog-Orchid_   64

     16 Comandra pallida DC. _White Comandra_                         74
     16 Eriogonum subalpinum Greene. _Tall White Eriogonum_           74

     17 Claytonia lanceolata Pursh. _Spring Beauty_                   80
     17 Claytonia parvifolia Moc. _Small-Leaved Spring Beauty_        80

     18 Silene acaulis L. _Moss Campion_                              82
     18 Lychnis apetala L. _Nodding Lychnis_                          82

     19 Alsine borealis (Bigel.) Britton. _Northern Stitchwort_       86
     19 Mœhringia lateriflora (L.) _Blunt-Leaved Sandwort_            86
     19 Arenaria capillaris nardifolia (Ledeb.) Regel.
            _Rock Sandwort_                                           86

     20 Caltha leptosepala Hook. _Caltha leptosepala_                104
     20 Trollius albiflorus (A. Gray) Rydb. _Western Globe-Flower_   104

     21 Aquilegia brevistyla Hook. _Small Blue Columbine_            102

     22 Aquilegia flavescens S. Wats. _Yellow Columbine_             106
     22 Aquilegia formosa Fisch. _Western Columbine_                 106

     23 Delphinium Brownii Rydb. _Mountain Larkspur_                 108
     23 Anemone globosa Nutt. _Wind-Flower_                          108

     24 Anemone Drummondii S. Wats. _Alpine Anemone_                  92
     24 Anemone parviflora Michx. _Northern Anemone_                  92

     25 Pulsatilla hirsutissima (Pursh) Britton _Pasque-Flower_       94
     25 Pulsatilla occidentalis (S. Wats.) Freyn. _Western Anemone_   94

     26 Atragene columbiana Nutt. _Purple Virgin’s-Bower_             90

     27 Ranunculus saxicola Rydb.  _Ranunculus saxicola_             100
     27 Ranunculus alpeophilus. A Nels. _Ranunculus alpeophilus_     100
     27 Ranunculus Eschscholtzii Schl. _Snow Buttercup_              100

     28 Ranunculus eremogenes Greene. _Ditch Crowfoot_                98
     28 Ranunculus Purshii Richards. _Pursh’s Buttercup_              98
     28 Ranunculus inamœnus Greene _Ranunculus inamœnus_              98

     29 Thalictrum megacarpum Torr. _Thalictrum megacarpum_           96
     29 Thalictrum occidentale A. Gray. _Western Meadow Rue_          96

     30 Delphinium Menziesii DC. _Blue Larkspur_                     110
     30 Lithophragma parviflora (Hook.) Nutt. _Lithophragma_         110

     31 Physaria didymocarpa (Hook.) A. Gray. _Bladder-Pod_          116
     31 Smelowskia calycina (Desv.) C. A. Meyer. _Smelowskia_        116

     32 Draba oligosperma Hook. _Whitlow-Grass_                      112
     32 Draba andina (Nutt.) A. Nels. _Mountain Whitlow-Grass_       112

     33 Draba glacialis Adams _Whitlow-Grass_                        114
     33 Draba aurea Vahl. _Golden Whitlow-Grass_                     114

     34 Parnassia montanensis Rydb. & Fern.
         _Marsh Grass-of-Parnassus_                                  126
     34 Ribes lacustre (Pers.) Poir. _Swamp Gooseberry_              126

     35 Mitella nuda L. _Naked Bishop’s-Cap_                         132
     35 Pectiantia pentandra (Hook.) Rydb. _Mitrewort_               132

     36 Saxifraga cernua L. _Nodding Saxifrage_                      136
     36 Saxifraga rivularis L. _Alpine Brook Saxifrage_              136

     37 Micranthes Nelsoniana (D. Don.) Small. _Nelson’s Saxifrage_  140
     37 Micranthes Lyallii (Engler) Small. _Lyall’s Saxifrage_       140

     38 Muscaria cæspitosa (L.) Haw.    _Tufted Saxifrage_           138
     38 Micranthes rhomboidea (Greene) Small. _Mountain Saxifrage_   138

     39 Spatularia Brunoniana (Bong.) Small. _Tall Saxifrage_        142
     39 Leptasea austromontana (Wiegand), Small. _Common Saxifrage_  142

     40 Tiarella unifoliata Hook. _Western Foam-Flower_              150
     40 Lutkea pectinata (Pursh) Kuntze. _Cut-Leaved Lutkea_         150

     41 Rubus pedatus Smith. _Creeping Raspberry_                    152

     42 Rubus parviflorus. Nutt. _Salmon-Berry_                      156

     43 Fragaria glauca (S. Wats.) Rydb. _Wild Strawberry_           158
     43 Amelanchier florida Lindl. _Service-Berry_                   158

     44 Dryas octopetala L. _White Mountain Avens_                   164
     44 Dryas Drummondii Rich. _Drummond’s Mountain Avens_           164

     45 Geum strictum Ait. _Yellow Avens_                            162
     45 Sieversia ciliata (Pursh) Don. _Long-Plumed Purple Avens_    162

     46 Phaca americana (Hook.) Rydb. _Arctic Vetch_                 172
     46 Homalobus aboriginorum (Rich) Rydb. _Indian Vetch_           172

     47 Aragallus deflexus. (Pall.) Heller. _Drooping Vetch_         176
     47 Aragallus viscidulus Rydb. _Sticky Oxytrope_                 176

     48 Aragallus Lamberti (Pursh) Greene. _Loco Weed_               180
     48 Lathyrus ochroleucus Hook. _White Vetch_                     180

     49 Empetrum nigrum L. _Black Crowberry_                         182
     49 Linum Lewisii Pursh. _Wild Blue-Flax_                        182

     50 Pachystima myrsinites (Pursh) Raf. _Mountain Lover_          184
     50 Viola adunca longipes (Nutt.) Rydb. _Dog Violet_             184

     51 Elæagnus argentea Pursh. _Silver-Berry_                      190
     51 Lepargyræa canadensis (L.) Greene _Buffalo-Berry_            190

     52 Epilobium luteum Pursh. _Yellow Willow-Herb_                 194
     52 Chamænerion latifolium (L.) Sweet. _Broad-Leaved Willow-Herb_194

     53 Chamænerion angustifolium (L.) Scop. _Fire-Weed_             196
     53 Berberis aquifolium Pursh. _Trailing Mahonia_                196

     54 Echinopanax horridum. (Smith) Dec. & Planch. _Devil’s Club_  200

     55 Cornus canadensis intermedia Farr. _Bunch-Berry_             204

     56 Pyrola asarifolia Michx. _Liver-Leaf Wintergreen_            208
     56 Pyrola uliginosa Torr. _Bog Wintergreen_                     208
     56 Moneses uniflora (L.) A. Gray. _One-Flowered Wintergreen_    208

     57 Chimaphila umbellata (L.) Nutt. _Prince’s Pine_              210
     57 Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng. _Bear-Berry_            210

     58 Oxycoccus oxycoccus (L.) MacM. _Small Cranberry_             212
     58 Gaultheria ovatifolia A. Gray. _Ovate-Leaved Wintergreen_    212
     58 Vitis-idæa Vitis-idæa (L.) Britton. _Mountain Cranberry_     212

     59 Cassiope Mertensiana (Bong.) Don. _White Heath_              216
     59 Phyllodoce empetriformis (Smith) Don. _Red False-Heather_    216
     59 Phyllodoce glanduliflora (Hook.) Rydb. _White False-Heather_ 216

     60 Ledum grœnlandicum Œder. _Labrador Tea_                      218
     60 Azaleastrum albiflorum (Hook.) Rydb.
         _White Mountain Rhododendron_                               218

     61 Menziesia ferruginea Smith. _Smooth Menziesea_               220
     61 Kalmia microphylla (Hook.) Heller. _Dwarf Swamp-Laurel_      220

     62 Vaccinium erythrococcum Rydb. _Alpine Bilberry_              222
     62 Vaccinium globulare Rydb. _Thin-Leaved Bilberry_             222
     62 Vaccinium ovalifolium Smith. _Blueberry_                     222

     63 Primula Maccalliana Wiegand. _Maccalla’s Primrose_           228
     63 Androsace carinata Torr. _Sweet Androsace_                   228

     64 Trientalis arctica Fisch. _Arctic Star-Flower_               230
     64 Dodecatheon conjugens Greene. _Shooting-Star_                230

     65 Gentiana affinis Griseb. _Large Gentian_                     234
     65 Romanzoffia sitchensis Bong. _Romanzoffia_                   234

     66 Phacelia sericea (Graham) A. Gray. _Mountain Phacelia_       238
     66 Phacelia heterophylla Pursh _Phacelia heterophylla_          238

     67 Lappula floribunda (Lehm.) Greene. _False Forget-me-not_     242
     67 Lithospermum linearifolium Goldie. _Narrow-Leaved Puccoon_   242

     68 Collinsia parviflora Dougl. _Small-Flowered Collinsia_       248
     68 Elephantella grœnlandica (Retz.) Rydb.
         _Long-Beaked Elephantella_                                  248

     69 Pentstemon confertus Dougl. _Yellow Beard-Tongue_            250
     69 Pentstemon pseudohumilis Rydb. _Pentstemon pseudohumilis_    250

     70 Pentstemon fruticosus (Pursh) Greene.
         _Large Purple Beard-Tongue_                                 262
     70 Pinguicula vulgaris L. _Butterwort_                          262

     71 Linnæa americana Forbes. _American Twin-Flower_              266
     71 Lonicera ebractulata Rydb. _Fly Honeysuckle_                 266

     72 Lonicera involucrata (Rich.) Banks.
         _Involucred Fly Honeysuckle_                                270

     73 Valeriana sitchensis Bong. _Wild Heliotrope_                 272
     73 Lobelia Kalmii strictiflora Rydb. _Brook Lobelia_            272

     74 Hieracium umbellatum L. _Narrow-Leaved Hawk-weed_            276
     74 Agoseris aurantiaca (Hook.) Greene. _Agoseris aurantiaca_    276

     75 Erigeron acris L. _Blue Fleabane_                            288
     75 Erigeron salsuginosus (Rich.) A. Gray.
         _Large Purple Fleabane_                                     288
     75 Saussurea densa Hook. _Saussurea_                            288

     76 Erigeron discoideus Rydb. _Cut-Leaved Fleabane_              292
     76 Erigeron melanocephalus A. Nelson. _Black-Headed Fleabane_   292
     76 Erigeron multifidus Rydb. _Cut-Leaved Fleabane_              292

     77 Aster Lindleyanus T. & G. _Aster Lindleyanus                 298

     78 Erigeron aureus Greene. _Golden Fleabane_                    302
     78 Gaillardia aristata Pursh. _Great-Flowered Gaillardia_       302

     79 Arnica cordifolia Hook. _Heart-Leaved Arnica_                304
     79 Arnica louiseana Farr. _Pale-Flowered Arnica_                304




GLOSSARY


    ACAULESCENT: with stem so short that leaves appear to arise
        directly from root.
    ACHENE: a small, dry, one-seeded indehiscent, seed-like fruit.
    ACUMINATE: tapering gradually to a point.
    ACUTE: with an abrupt point.
    ADNATE: growing together as the stamens with the petals, or the
        anthers with the filament.
    ALTERNATE: (leaves) not opposite but arising at different points
        on the stem. Stamens are alternate with petals when they are
        situated in the intervals.
    ANTHER: the part of the stamen which contains the pollen.
    APICAL: pertaining to the top or apex.
    AURICULATE: with ear-like appendages at base.
    AXIAL: pertaining to an axis.

    BILABIATE: two-lipped.
    BLADE: the expanded portion of a leaf.
    BRACT: a modified and usually small leaf at the base of a flower
        or flower-cluster. In the latter case it is usually
        associated with others.
    BRACTEOLATE: furnished with small bracts.

    CÆSPITOSE: growing in tufts.
    CALYX: the outer whorl of floral leaves forming usually a green cup.
    CAMPANULATE: bell-shaped.
    CANESCENT: greyish-white, due usually to fine hairs.
    CAPILLARY: hair-like.
    CAPITATE: arranged in a head; knob-like.
    CAPSULE: a dry, dehiscent seed-vessel.
    CARPEL: a pistil-leaf. The pistil is regarded as being composed of
        one or more such carpels.
    CATKIN: the scaly, cylindrical flower-cluster of Willow, Birch, etc.
    CAUDATE: with a tail-like appendage.
    CAUDEX: the perennial rootstock of an otherwise annual plant.
    CHARTACEOUS: papery or parchment-like.
    CILIATE: fringed with marginal hairs.
    CINEREOUS: ashen or greyish.
    CLEISTOGAMIC: (flowers) never opening as the late flowers of
        violets, etc.
    CONNATE: united.
    CORDATE: heart-shaped.
    CORIACEOUS: leathery.
    CORM: a solid bulb.
    CORYMBOSE: with a flat-topped or convex flower-cluster, the
        flower-stalks of which arise at different points on the axis,
        and of which the outermost flowers are the oldest.
    CRENATE: with rounded teeth.
    CRENULATE: with small rounded teeth.
    CUNEATE: wedge-shaped.
    CUSPIDATE: ending in a sharp, hard point.
    CYME: a flat-topped or convex flower-cluster, the flower-stalks of
        which arise at different points on the axis, and of which the
        innermost flowers are the oldest.

    DECIDUOUS: subject to fall, as leaves of most trees and calyx and
        corolla of most flowers before the fruit forms.
    DECUMBENT: (stems) reclining on the ground with summit tending
        to rise.
    DECURRENT: (leaves) with base prolonged below insertion and forming
        a sort of wing.
    DELTOID: broadly triangular.
    DENTATE: toothed, usually with teeth projecting outwards.
    DENTICULATE: with little, outwardly projecting teeth.
    DIŒCIOUS: having staminate and pistillate flowers on separate
        plants.
    DISC: the central part of a head as opposed to the ray,
          _e. g._, in the sun-flower. Also a fleshy expansion
                   of the receptacle of the flower.
    DRUPE: a stone-fruit.
    DRUPELET: a small stone-fruit.

    ELLIPTIC: with the outline of an ellipse.
    ENTIRE: with the margin even and not toothed, lobed, or divided.
    EROSE: irregularly margined.

    FIMBRIATE: fringed.
    FLOCCOSE: with loose tufts of wool-like hairs.
    FOLIACEOUS: leaf-like.
    FOLLICLE: a fruit of one carpel (pistil-leaf) which splits only
        by one suture.
    FUSIFORM: spindle-shaped.

    GALEA: a helmet-shaped body.
    GLANDULAR: with small prominences which appear to have a secreting
       function.
    GLAUCOUS: covered with a bluish or white bloom.
    GLOBOSE: spherical.

    INCISED: sharply and irregularly cut into.
    INDUSIUM: the membrane covering the fruit-dots of ferns.
    INFERIOR: (side of flower) the one away from the axis of the
        flower-cluster; (ovary) united with the calyx tube, the
        other floral parts apparently growing from its summit.
    INFLORESCENCE: the mode of arrangement of flowers on the stem;
        the flower-cluster.
    INTERNODE: the portion of the stem between the places where the
        leaves arise.
    INVOLUCRE: a whorl of small leaves at the base of a flower
        or flower-cluster.

    KEEL: the lower petals of the peculiar corolla of the pea, etc.,
        which are united in the form of the keel of a boat.

    LACINIATE: with deep, triangular, narrow lobes.
    LANATE: woolly.
    LANCEOLATE: narrow and tapering at each end.
    LATERAL: pertaining to the side.
    LEAFLET: one of the divisions of the blade of a compound leaf.
    LINEAR: narrow and flat with the margins parallel.
    LYRATE: lyre-shaped.

    MONŒCIOUS: having the separate staminate and pistillate flowers
        on the same plant.
    MUCRONATE: with a short, abrupt point.

    NODE: the point of the stem from which one or more leaves arise.

    OBLANCEOLATE: lance-shaped with the base tapering downwards.
    OBTUSE: blunt.
    ORBICULAR: circular.
    OVATE: egg-shaped (applied to flat bodies).
    OVOID: egg-shaped (applied to solids).

    PALMATE: (compound leaf) with the divisions so arranged that they
        radiate from the petiole-like the fingers of the hand.
    PANICLE: a branched, flower-cluster with the older flowers
        outermost.
    PANICULATE: with much branched open flower clusters.
    PAPILLÆ: minute, blunt projections.
    PAPPUS: the bristles, awns, or hairs which crown the fruit of
        the Composites.
    PARIETAL: (placentæ) attached to the wall of the ovary.
    PEDUNCLE: a flower-stalk.
    PERENNIAL: lasting from year to year.
    PERFOLIATE: (leaves) having the basal part so extended and united
        as to make it appear as though the stem grew through them.
    PERIANTH: the calyx and corolla collectively.
    PETAL: a corolla-leaf.
    PETALOID: petal-like.
    PETIOLE: the leaf-stalk.
    PINNÆ: the primary divisions of a compound leaf.
    PINNATE: compound with leaflets arranged along a common axis.
    PINNATIFID: pinnately cleft.
    PINNULES: secondary pinnæ.
    PLACENTÆ: the parts of the ovary to which the seeds are attached.
    PLUMOSE: feathery.
    POLLEN: the fertilising powder of the anther.
    POLYGAMOUS: having both perfect and imperfect flowers.
    PROSTRATE: lying flat on the ground.
    PUBERULENT: covered with tiny almost imperceptible hairs.
    PULVINI: cushions or pads.

    RACEME: a flower-cluster in which the stalked flowers are arranged
        along an elongated axis.
    RACEMOSE: raceme-like.
    RACHIS: the axis.
    RADICAL: arising from the root, or portion of the stem resembling
       the root.
    RECEPTACLE: the usually somewhat enlarged portion of the stem on
        which parts of a flower or of a flower-cluster are borne.
    RENIFORM: kidney-shaped.
    REPAND: wavy-margined.
    RETICULATE: arranged like a network.
    REVOLUTE: rolled backward.
    RHIZOME: an underground stem; a rootstock.
    RHOMBIC: having the shape of a four-sided figure with parallel and
        equal sides which may be either perpendicular or oblique to
        each other.
    RHOMBOID: of a somewhat rhombic shape.
    ROTATE: wheel-shaped.
    RUNCINATE: coarsely cut into with the segments turned backward.

    SAGITTATE: shaped like an arrow-head with the lobes turned downward.
    SAMARA: a simple, indehiscent, winged fruit.
    SAPROPHYTE: a plant which grows on dead organic matter.
    SCALE: a minute, rudimentary leaf.
    SCAPE: a leafless or nearly leafless flower-stalk arising from near
        the ground.
    SCARIOUS: dry, thin, membranous.
    SCURF: minute scales on the epidermis (skin).
    SEPALS: the divisions of the calyx.
    SERRATE: with teeth pointing forwards.
    SERRULATE: with minute forward pointing teeth.
    SESSILE: (leaf) without any stalk.
    SHEATH: a tubular structure such as is formed by the lower part of
        the leaves of grasses, etc.
    SILICLE: a short and broad silique.
    SILIQUE: the elongated two-valved and usually dehiscent fruit of the
        Cress family. It is divided by a partition and the placentæ are
        parietal.
    SINUATE: with a strongly wavy margin.
    SINUS: the recess between the lobes of a leaf.
    SORI: the fruit-dots of ferns.
    SPADIX: a fleshy spike as in the Araceæ.
    SPATHE: a large bract or pair of bracts enclosing a flower or an
        inflorescence.
    SPATULATE: spoon-shaped.
    SPIKE: a flower-cluster in which the flowers are stalkless on an
        elongated axis.
    SPORANGES: the sacs containing the spores.
    SPORE: the reproductive body of ferns.
    SPOROPHYLL: leaf-like organ or receptacle containing spores.
    STAMEN: the organ of the flower which produces the pollen.
    STAMINODIA: sterile stamens or structures which are developed
        in the place of stamens.
    STELLATE: star-shaped.
    STIPE: the leaf-stalk of a fern.
    STIPULE: an appendage such as is found at the base of many
        leaf-stalks.
    STOLON: a trailing and rooting shoot.
    STRIATE: marked with slender, longitudinal stripes.
    STRICT: straight and upright.
    STYLE: (of pistil) the elongated portion at top of ovary.
    SUBULATE: awl-shaped.
    SUPERIOR: (side of flower) the one next the axis of a
        flower-cluster; (ovary) free from calyx tube.

    TERETE: cylindrical, circular in cross-section.
    TERNATE: in threes.
    TOMENTOSE: clothed with matted wool-like hairs.
    TORULOSE: knobby; swollen at intervals.
    TRUNCATE: as if cut off at the top.
    TUBERCLE: a small knob-like outgrowth.
    TURBINATE: top-shaped.

    UMBEL: an umbrella-like flower-cluster.
    UNDULATE: wavy.

    VALVATE: (leaves in bud) meeting by the margins, not overlapping.
    VERTICILLATE: whorled.
    VEXILLUM: the standard of the peculiar flower of pea, etc.
    VILLOUS: with long soft hairs.




GENERAL KEY TO THE FAMILIES


                        PLANTS WITHOUT FLOWERS

                    FERNS AND THEIR ALLIES

    Leaves large, fern-like.
       Sporanges in a spike or panicle above the sterile leaf.
                                                       =Ophioglossaceæ.=
       Sporanges borne in sori, on the backs or margins of the leaves.
                                                         =Polypodiaceæ.=
    Leaves small, reduced to scales.
       Stems erect, hollow, jointed, rush-like; leaves reduced to
        sheaths at the joints; sporanges in the terminal, cone-like
        spike.                                            =Equisetaceæ.=
       Stems not hollow, creeping; leaves numerous, scale-like;
        sporanges of one kind, solitary in the axils of the leaves.
                                                         =Lycopodiaceæ.=
       Stems creeping, moss-like; leaves numerous; sporanges of two
        kinds in the axils of the upper leaves, which are formed into
        a quadrangular spike.                          =Selaginellaceæ.=

                          PLANTS WITH FLOWERS

              WOODY STEMMED PLANTS; TREES, SHRUBS, AND VINES

    TREES OR SHRUBS WITH RESINOUS JUICE; LEAVES USUALLY EVERGREEN.
    Fruit a cone, either dry or berry-like.                   =Pinaceæ.=
    Fruit a fleshy crimson berry.                             =Taxaceæ.=

              TREES, SHRUBS, OR VINES WITH WATERY JUICE.
    Leaves deciduous.
        _Flowers in catkins._
            Staminate and pistillate catkins on different
             plants; seed with white, silky hairs.          =Salicaceæ.=
            Staminate and pistillate catkins on the same
              plant; fruit cone-like.                       =Betulaceæ.=
        _Flowers not in catkins._
            (A) Trees.
                Leaves simple, not lobed; flowers white.     =Drupaceæ.=
                Leaves lobed; flowers greenish-yellow.       =Aceraceæ.=
                Leaves pinnate; flowers white.                =Pomaceæ.=
            (B) Shrubs or vines.
                *Stems spiny erect or trailing.
                    (_a_) Leaves simple or lobed.
                        Flowers small in dense terminal racemes.
                                                            =Araliaceæ.=
                        Flowers few in axillary clusters or racemes.
                                                       =Grossulariaceæ.=
                    (_b_) Leaves pinnate or palmate.          =Rosaceæ.=
                **Stems not spiny but with minute scales;
                    fruit silver, scarlet or orange berries.
                                                           =Elæagnaceæ.=
                ***Stems erect, smooth.
                    (_a_) Petals distinct.
                        †Leaves simple.
                            Flowers small, in flat heads or clusters.
                                Petals 4; stamens 4.         =Cornaceæ.=
                                Petals 5; stamens numerous.   =Rosaceæ.=

                            Flowers in axillary clusters or racemes;
                                petals 5; stamens numerous.
                              Fruit a berry.                 =Drupaceæ.=
                              Fruit a pome.                   =Pomaceæ.=
                          ††Leaves pinnate; flowers yellow.   =Rosaceæ.=
                          (_b_) Petals united.
                              Flowers small, short-campanulate in
                                  axillary or terminal heads.
                                                        =Caprifoliaceæ.=
                              Flowers large, funnel-form, in terminal
                                  or axillary clusters. (_Azaleastrum_)
                                                             =Ericaceæ.=
                              Flowers bell or urn-shaped, few, axillary.
                                                          =Vacciniaceæ.=
                         ****Stems creeping or twining, smooth or hairy.
                              Flowers with distinct petals, blue or
                               purple. (_Atragene_).     =Ranunculaceæ.=
                              Flowers with united petals.
                                  Corolla tubular.      =Caprifoliaceæ.=
                                  Corolla bell-shaped.       =Ericaceæ.=
    Leaves evergreen; shrubs or vines.
        Leaves pinnate; flowers yellow.                  =Berberidaceæ.=
        Leaves simple.
            Flowers inconspicuous; fruit a black berry.    =Empetraceæ.=
            Flowers showy, open, campanulate or urn-shaped,
                white or pink.                               =Ericaceæ.=

                      HERBACEOUS PLANTS

    Plants without leaves.
        Parasitic on branches or stems of evergreens.     =Loranthaceæ.=
        Not parasitic on trees; roots coral-like. (_Corallorhiza_)
                                                           =Orchidaceæ.=
    Plants with leaves.
        _Leaves parallel-veined._
            (A) Flowers small, collected on a spadix.         =Araceæ.=
            (B) Flowers not collected on a spadix.
                *Flowers regular; corolla lobes 6; stamens 6.
                  (_a_) Leaves grass-like, mostly at the base.
                    Flowers white or greenish.           =Melanthaceæ.=
                    Flowers pink. (_Allium_).          =Liliaceæ.=
                    Flowers blue. (_Sisyrinchium_).    =Iridaceæ.=
                  (_b_) Leaves not grass-like, mostly on the stem.
                    Flowers white or pink.            =Convallariaceæ.=
                    Flowers green.                       =Melanthaceæ.=
                    Flowers yellow or orange.               =Liliaceæ.=
                    Flowers red or wine-color. (_Kruhsea_.)
                                                      =Convallariaceæ.=
               **Flowers irregular, frequently with broad or
                    inflated lip and spur.                =Orchidaceæ.=
        _Leaves not parallel-veined._
           (A) Flowers small, in close heads surrounded by an involucre.
                    Flowers all alike, florets ligulate.  =Cichoriaceæ.=
                    Flowers not alike, central ones tubular, marginal
                       usually with rays.                   =Carduaceæ.=
           (B) Flowers in umbels at the ends of the stems or branches.
                Umbels broad, flat or nearly so, flowers white, yellow,
                    or purple.                                =Apiaceæ.=
                Umbels round.
                    Flowers greenish; leaves compound.      =Araliaceæ.=
                    Flowers white or pink; leaves simple.
                     (_Eriogonum_.)                       =Polygonaceæ.=
           (C) Flowers not in umbels.
               *Flowers regular.
                  (_a_) Flowers with 2 sepals and 5 petals;
                      corolla pink.                      =Portulacaceæ.=
                  (_b_) Flowers with 3 sepals and 3 petals;
                      seeds triangular.                   =Polygonaceæ.=

                  (_c_) Flowers with 4 sepals and 4 petals.
                      Stem angular; leaves in whorls.        =Rubiaceæ.=
                      Stem round; leaves not in whorls.
                          Stamens 6, erect.               =Brassicaceæ.=
                          Stamens 8, spreading.             =Onagraceæ.=
                  (_d_) Flowers with 5 sepals or petals, distinct.
                     †Stamens as many or twice as many as the
                       corolla lobes.
                      Stems swollen at the nodes.      =Caryophyllaceæ.=
                      Stems not swollen at the nodes.
                          Stem leaves numerous, entire, thin;
                             flowers in terminal or axillary
                             clusters, white or greenish.  =Santalaceæ.=
                     Leaves basal, entire; flowers solitary
                          on a 1-leaved scape.           =Parnassiaceæ.=
                     Leaves mostly basal, lobed or cut;
                       flowers in a close spike or head. =Saxifragaceæ.=
                     Leaves and stems fleshy.
                         Follicles 2.                    =Saxifragaceæ.=
                         Follicles 4.                     =Crassulaceæ.=
                     Leaves numerous, stiff, awl-shaped;
                         stems low, tufted.              =Saxifragaceæ.=
              ††Stamens more than twice as many as the corolla lobes.
                  §Leaves basal or mostly so.
                   Leaves evergreen, simple or lobed, flowers yellow
                         or white, solitary on naked scapes.
                         (_Dryas._)                           =Rosaceæ.=
                   Leaves not evergreen, simple, lobed, or much divided.
                         Smooth.
                            Stems erect or floating.     =Ranunculaceæ.=
                            Stems creeping.
                               Flowers white or pink.         =Rosaceæ.=
                               Flowers yellow.           =Ranunculaceæ.=
                         Rough-hairy.
                            Flowers yellow or pink.           =Rosaceæ.=
                            Flowers white, blue or purple.
                                                         =Ranunculaceæ.=
                    §§Leaves mostly on the stem.
                         Leaves finely cut; stems creeping; flowers
                          white.                              =Rosaceæ.=
                         Leaves entire.
                           Leaves bright green, black-dotted;
                               flowers yellow.            =Hypericaceæ.=
                         Leaves glaucous, without black dots;
                               flowers blue.                  =Linaceæ.=
                  (_e_) Flowers with 5 sepals and 5 united petals
                                or lobes.
                            †Stamens 3; flowers small, in terminal
                              clusters.                  =Valerianaceæ.=
                           ††Stamens 5.
                               Opposite to the corolla lobes.
                                                           =Primulaceæ.=
                               Alternate with the corolla lobes.
                                  Stems smooth, leafy; corolla
                                   campanulate.
                                  Stem leaves broad; flowers pink.
                                                           =Apocynaceæ.=

                                  Stem leaves narrow; flowers blue.
                                                         =Campanulaceæ.=
                         Stems rough-hairy.
                            Corolla salver-form; stamens included.
                                                          =Boraginaceæ.=
                            Corolla tubular; stamens exserted.
                                                        =Hydrophyllacæ.=

                          †††Stamens 10; flowers mostly in terminal
                                 heads or singly.           =Pyrolaceæ.=
               **Flowers irregular.
                 (_a_) Leaves all entire and basal, forming rosettes;
                               flowers blue.          =Lentibulariaceæ.=
                 (_b_) Leaves all heart-shaped; flowers blue, white
                               or yellow.                    =Violaceæ.=
                 (_c_) Leaves not heart-shaped, simple or much cut,
                               not pinnate.
                            Stems square; flowers in close verticels in
                               the axils of the leaves or in terminal
                               heads.                       =Menthaceæ.=
                            Stems round; flowers numerous in elongated
                               terminal leafy heads or few on slender
                               stems in the axils of the upper leaves.
                                                      =Scrophulariaceæ.=
                 (_d_) Leaves palmate; flowers blue in elongated spikes.
                                                         =Ranunculaceæ.=
                 (_e_) Leaves pinnately divided; flowers pea-like.
                                                         =Papilionaceæ.=
                 (_f_) Leaves compoundly lobed, not pinnate.
                            Stems low, spreading, flowers small in
                                dense terminal or axillary spikes.
                                                          =Papaveraceæ.=
                            Stems erect; flowers drooping in open
                                terminal heads, either showy and spurred
                                or not showy and without spurs; leaves
                                maiden-hair fern-like.   =Ranunculaceæ.=




Alpine Flora of the Canadian Rocky Mountains




OPHIOGLOSSACEÆ

_Adder’s-Tongue Family_


More or less succulent fern-like plants, consisting of a stem and
leaf growing from a fleshy root. Sporophyll in the form of a spike or
panicle.

[Sidenote: =Botrychium lunaria= (L.) Sw. _Moon-wort._]

Very fleshy, 2—12 inches high. Leaf usually sessile, borne at or
above the middle of the stem, pinnate with 2—8 pairs of moon-like or
fan-shaped lobes which vary from crenate to entire and either close
and folded together or distant; spore-bearing portion 2—3 pinnate,
often dense, 1—2 inches long, about as high as the leaf.

In open or exposed situations, frequently on the tops of the highest
mountains, rather rare; occurring in midsummer.

[Sidenote: =Botrychium simplex= E. Hitchcock. _Small Moon-wort._]

Plant 2—6 inches high, slender and very variable. Leaf ovate, obovate
or oblong, entire, lobed or pinnately parted, borne near the base of
the stem; spore-bearing portion a simple or slightly compound spike,
sometimes reduced to only a few sporanges; apex of the leaf and
spore-bearing portion erect in fruit.

In alpine meadows or grassy slopes, frequently through the Rockies but
very inconspicuous; during summer.

[Sidenote: =Botrychium virginianum= (L.) Sw. _Virginia Grape Fern._]

Stem slender, 4 inches to 2 feet high. Leaf thin, ternately divided
and spreading 3—12 inches across, pinnately much divided into
oblong-toothed segments; spore-bearing portion long-stalked, much
above the leaf 2—3 pinnate, cinnamon brown, when ripe.

In rich moist woods, sparingly throughout the region during the summer.




POLYPODIACEÆ

_Fern Family_


Ferns of various habits, the rootstocks horizontal, often elongated or
short and erect; the leaves simple, pinnate, pinnatifid or decompound,
coiled at the ends when young. Sporanges borne in clusters (_sori_)
on the lower side or margins of the leaves or their segments, with or
without a membranous covering (_indusium_).

    Represented in the region by the following 10 genera.

    Sori without indusia, leaves 2—3 pinnate or ternate.  =Phegopteris.=
    Sori with marginal indusia formed by the more or less altered edge
     of the leaf.
        Sporanges at the ends of the veins, borne on a reflexed
            portion of the leaf.                             =Adiantum.=
        Sporanges on a continuous vein-like receptacle
            which connects the apices of the veins.         =Pteridium.=

    Sporanges at or near the ends of the unconnected veins.
      Leaves of two kinds, the spore-bearing ones contracted
          and more or less pod-like.                     =Cryptogramma.=
      Leaves uniform; sori minute, indusium usually interrupted.
                                                          =Cheilanthes.=
    Sori not marginal, provided with spinal indusia.
        Sori oblong on oblique veins; leaves pinnate.       =Asplenium.=
        Sori round.
            Indusium conspicuous.
                Leaves firm; indusium peltate.            =Polystichum.=
                Leaves membranous; indusium reniform.      =Dryopteris.=
            Indusium inconspicuous.
               Indusium under the sorus, stellately divided.  =Woodsia.=
               Indusium hooded, fixed by a broad base.          =Filix.=

[Sidenote: =Phegopteris alpestris= (Hoppe) Mett. _Western Beech Fern._]

Rootstock short, thick, erect or oblique; stems 4—10 inches long with
a few brown spreading scales near the base; leaves 1—2 feet long,
oblong-lanceolate, thrice pinnate, the pinnæ deltoid-lanceolate, the
lower ones distant and smaller, pinnules oblong-lanceolate, finely
cut-toothed; sori small, rounded and nearly marginal.

On moist banks in the Selkirks, frequent especially in the vicinity of
Glacier, where it forms clumps of considerable diameter, up to 7000
feet elevation.

[Sidenote: =Phegopteris Phegopteris= (L.) Underw. _Long Beech Fern._]

Rootstock slender and creeping; stems 6—9 inches long; leaves
triangular, thin, usually longer than broad, 6—9 inches long,
4—6 inches broad, hairy on the veins, especially beneath; pinnæ
linear-lanceolate, the lowest pair deflexed and standing forward,
segments oblong, obtuse, entire, the basal ones joined to the main
rachis; sori small, near the margin.

In moist woods in the Selkirks at the lower elevations, not common.

[Sidenote: =Phegopteris Dryopteris= (L.) Fée. _Oak Fern._]

Rootstock slender, extensively creeping; leaves or short black stipes,
broadly triangular 4—8 inches wide, the three primary divisions 1—2
pinnate, segments oblong, obtuse, entire or toothed; sori near the
margin.

In moist woods and thickets throughout the region at the lower
altitudes, frequently forming beds of considerable size.

[Sidenote: =Adiantum pedatum= L. _Maidenhair Fern._]

Rootstock slender, creeping; stems 9—18 inches long, dark chestnut
brown or nearly black, shining, forked into nearly equal branches
at the summit; leaves obliquely orbicular in outline, 8—18 inches
broad, thin, the pinnæ arising from the branches of the stem, somewhat
radiately arranged, the larger ones 6—10 inches long, 1—2 inches
broad, pinnules triangular-oblong, or the terminal one fan-shaped, the
lower margin entire and slightly curved, the upper cut, bearing the
linear-oblong sori.

Sparingly throughout the region in woods or moist shaded situations,
among rocks.

[Sidenote: =Pteridium aquilinum pubescens= Underw. _Bracken._]

Rootstock stout, widely creeping, subterranean; stems hairy, 1—2 feet
high, erect, straw-colored or brownish, leaves soft-hairy, especially
on the under surface, 2—4 feet long, 1—3 feet wide, ternate, the three
branches each bipinnate, the upper pinnules undivided, the lower more
or less pinnatifid.

In dry woods, thickets, and open hillsides, throughout the region.

[Sidenote: =Cryptogramma acrostichoides= R. Br. _American Rock-brake._]

Rootstock stout, short, and chaffy; stems densely tufted,
straw-colored, 2—6 inches long, very slender, chaffy below; leaves
ovate or ovate-lanceolate in outline, thin, smooth, 2—3 pinnate, the
sterile shorter than the fertile, their segments and pinnules crowded,
ovate-oblong or obovate, crenate or slightly sharply cut; fertile
leaves with linear or linear-oblong segments half an inch long, the
margins at first rolled back to the midrib, at maturity expanded and
exposing the light brown sporanges.

Forming tufts among rocks throughout the region but most frequent in
the Selkirks.

[Sidenote: =Cryptogramma Stelleri= (S. G. Gmel.) Prantl. _Slender
Cliff-brake_.]

Rootstock slender, creeping, thread-like; stems slender, scattered 2—3
inches long, dark brown; leaves thin, ovate in outline 2—5 inches long,
1—2 inches wide, 2—3 pinnate or pinnatifid above, the fertile taller,
with narrower pinnules and segments, pinnæ lanceolate-deltoid, cut to
the rachis, in few lobed or entire segments; indusium broad; veins
conspicuous.

In crevices of damp or dripping rocks, preferably limestone, in the
Rockies up to 7000 feet elevation; not common.

[Sidenote: =Cheilanthes Féei= Moore. _Hairy Lip Fern._]

Rootstock creeping, covered with pale rusty-brown scales; stems tufted,
wiry, chestnut brown, 2—4 inches long, hairy; leaves oblong-lanceolate
in outline 4—9 inches long, gradually attenuate to the apex, twice
pinnate; pinnules somewhat distant, lanceolate-deltoid, acute, deeply
pinnatifid or incised, more or less covered with stiff hairs and
usually somewhat glandular; sori numerous, covered by the infolded ends
of the rounded oblong lobes.

On rocks and among broken stones at the lower altitudes of the eastern
Rockies; growing in matted masses.

[Sidenote: =Asplenium viride= Huds. _Green Spleenwort._]

Rootstock stout, creeping, chaffy with brown scales; stems numerous,
densely tufted, brownish below, green above; leaves linear-lanceolate,
2—8 inches long, once pinnate, pale green, with 12—20 pairs of ovate
or rhomboid, crenate; obtuse, unequal-sided pinnules; sori oblong,
numerous, or scattered.

On dry rocks and slides, frequent through the Rockies.

[Sidenote: =Asplenium Filix-fœmina= (L.) Bernh. _Lady Fern._]

Rootstock creeping, rather slender for the size of the plant; stems
tufted, 6—10 inches long; straw-colored, brownish or reddish, with
scattered brown scales which are large and numerous at the broadened
base; leaves broadly oblong-lanceolate, pinnæ lanceolate, acuminate,
4—8 inches long; pinnules lanceolate, incised or serrate, sori short,
the indusia straight or variously curved.

In moist woods and thickets throughout the region but especially in the
Selkirks, being a common fern in the woods in the vicinity of Glacier.

[Sidenote: =Polystichum Lonchitis= (L.) Roth. _Holly Fern._]

Rootstock short, stout, and densely chaffy; stems 1—5 inches long,
bearing large dark brown scales, with some smaller ones; leaves rigid,
leathery, and evergreen, narrowly lanceolate in outline, once pinnate;
pinnæ broadly lanceolate, scythe-shaped, 1—2 inches long, acute or
acuminate at the apex, with an ear-like projection on the upper side
at the base, and with a nearly straight edge on the lower, densely
spiny-toothed; sori large, nearer the margin than the midrib.

In large tufts among rocks throughout the region.

[Sidenote: =Dryopteris Filix-mas= (L.) Schott. _Male Fern._]

Rootstock stout, ascending, or erect, chaffy; stems 4—6 inches long,
very chaffy below; leaves broadly lanceolate, acute or acuminate at
the apex, slightly narrowed at the base, 1—3 feet long, rather firm,
half evergreen, pinnate or partly 2-pinnate; pinnæ lanceolate, broadest
at the base, gradually acuminate, 3—6 inches long, pinnatifid almost
to the rachis, or pinnately divided into oblong, smooth lobes; sori
large, borne near the margin, more numerous on the lower halves of the
segments.

In rocky woods in the Selkirks on the lower slopes of Mt. Macdonald.

[Sidenote: =Dryopteris spinulosa dilatata= (Hoffm.) Underw. _Spinulose
Shield Fern._]

Rootstock stout, chaffy; stems 6—18 inches long, bearing large brown
scales with dark centres; leaves broadly ovate or triangular-ovate,
commonly 3-pinnate; pinnules lanceolate oblong, the lowest often much
elongated; sori medium size; indusium smooth.

In moist woods through the Selkirks, probably the most abundant fern in
the vicinity of Glacier.

[Sidenote: =Dryopteris oreopteris= (Sw.) Maxon.]

Rootstock short, erect or decumbent, scaly; stems light straw-colored,
2—6 inches long, tufted, copiously scaly throughout, with light brown
scales; leaves 1½—2 feet long, rather firm, broadly lanceolate,
gradually tapering from near the middle to both ends; pinnæ 2—3 inches
long, deeply pinnatifid, gradually shorter to the lowest which are more
distant, broadly triangular, and less than an inch long; segments flat,
oblong, and nearly entire; rachis straw-colored, densely scaly with
light brown scales, nearly to the apex.

In the Selkirks on the moist mountain slopes and rocky ravines at
Glacier.

[Sidenote: =Woodsia scopulina= D. C. Eaton. _Rocky Mountain Woodsia._]

Rootstock short, creeping, and densely chaffy; stems brown, darker
at the base, 2—4 inches long, glandular-hairy; leaves mostly
glandular-hairy throughout, lanceolate, 6—12 inches long, tapering from
about the middle to both ends; pinnæ numerous, oblong-ovate, pinnatifid
into oblong-toothed segments; sori nearly marginal.

In crevices in the rocks and among broken stones on slides, throughout
the Rockies, up to an elevation of 7000 feet; frequent.

[Sidenote: =Woodsia oregana= D. C. Eaton. _Oregon Woodsia._]

Rootstock short; stems smooth, brownish below. Leaves smooth, 2—10
inches long, lanceolate; pinnæ triangular, oblong, obtuse, pinnatifid,
lower ones rounded and somewhat remote from the others; rachis
straw-colored; pinnules oblong-ovate, dentate or crenate, the teeth
often turned back and covering the submarginal sori.

Among broken stones on the slides near the base of Mt. Stephen in the
Rockies.

[Sidenote: =Filix fragilis= (L.) Underw. _Brittle Fern._]

Rootstock short; stems 4—8 inches long, leaves thin, smooth throughout,
oblong-lanceolate, only slightly tapering below, 4—10 inches long;
pinnate or 2—3 pinnatifid; pinnæ lanceolate-ovate, irregularly
pinnatifid with a broad central space, and bluntly or sharply toothed
segments, decurrent along the margined or winged rachis; sori small,
half way between the margin and the midrib; indusium narrow, soon
withering.

In crevices in rocks and among broken stones throughout the Rockies.

[Sidenote: =Filix montana= (Lam.) Underw.]

Rootstock slender, widely creeping; stipes 6—9 inches long, slender;
leaves deltoid-ovate, 3—4 pinnate, 3—6 inches broad, the lowest pinnæ
triangular-lanceolate and much larger, their inferior pinnules 1—1½
inches long, deeply divided into oblong lobes, deeply toothed; sori
numerous; indusium acute, soon withering.

On damp mossy banks and rocks throughout the Rockies; not common.




EQUISETACEÆ

_Horsetail Family_


Green, rush-like plants with usually hollow, jointed, simple or often
much branched stems, rising from subterranean rootstocks; the branches
verticillate.

Leaves reduced to toothed sheaths; sporanges clustered beneath the
scales of terminal, cone-like spikes.

[Sidenote: =Equisetum arvense= L. _Field Horsetail._]

Stems annual, the fertile appearing in early spring before the sterile;
fertile stems 4—10 inches high, soon withering, light brown, their
loose sheaths mostly distant, whitish, ending in about 12 brown
acuminate teeth; sterile stems green, much branched and slender, 2
inches to 2 feet high with numerous, mostly simple, 4-angled solid
branches with 4-toothed sheaths.

In moist sandy soil throughout the region, frequent in wet woods and
swampy places.

[Sidenote: =Equisetum sylvaticum= L. _Wood Horsetail._]

Stems annual, the fertile appearing in early spring before the sterile,
at first simple, at length much branched, resembling the sterile
except in the withered apex; stems 8—20 inches high, producing
verticillate compound branches which are curved downward; sheaths loose
and cylindric, those of the stem whitish, with 8—14 rather blunt brown
teeth.

In moist sandy woods and thickets in the Selkirks, not common.

[Sidenote: =Equisetum fluviatile= L. _Swamp Horsetail._]

Stems annual, all alike, 2—4 feet high, bluish-green, smooth, usually
producing upright branches after the spores are formed; sheaths
appressed with about 18 dark brown or nearly black, short acute teeth.

In sloughs and shallow ponds throughout the region, frequent.

[Sidenote: =Equisetum hyemale= L. _Common Scouring rush._]

Stems stiff, evergreen, 2—4 feet high, rough, 8—34-furrowed, the ridges
with two distinct lines of tubercles; sheaths rather long, cylindric,
marked with one or two black girdles, teeth dark brown or nearly black
and membranous, soon deciduous; spikes tipped with a rigid point.

In wet places and on banks and slides in the valley of the Kicking
Horse River.

[Sidenote: =Equisetum variegatum= Schl. _Variegated Equisetum._]

Stems perennial, slender, evergreen, 6—18 inches long, rough, usually
simple from a branched base, commonly tufted, 5—10 furrowed; sheaths
companulate, distinctly 4-keeled, green variegated with black above;
the teeth 5—10, each tipped with a deciduous bristle.

In moist, sandy soil throughout the region up to an elevation of 7000
feet, sometimes forming large patches.

[Sidenote: =Equisetum scirpoides= Michx.]

Stems perennial, evergreen, very slender, 3—6 inches long, rough,
flexuous and curving, growing in tufts closely matted to the ground,
mostly 6-furrowed with acute ridges, simple or branching from near
the base; sheaths black, with three membranous rather persistent
bristle-tipped teeth.

On moist sandy shaded banks throughout the Rockies.




LYCOPODIACEÆ

_Club-moss Family_


Branching, moss-like plants with small lanceolate or subulate,
sometimes oblong or roundish simple leaves, arranged in two or many
ranks on trailing or sometimes erect, usually branched stems.

Sporanges solitary in the axils of the leaves or on their upper
surfaces.

[Sidenote: =Lycopodium Selago= L. _Fir Club-moss._]

Stems usually yellowish throughout, 3—6 inches high, thick, rigid,
erect, 2—5 times forked, the branches forming a level topped cluster;
leaves crowded, uniform, ascending, elongated, lanceolate with a spiny
tip, the upper mostly 8-ranked and sterile, those below bearing small
sporanges in their axils, leaves of the lower half of the stems again
sterile; plant propagated also by enlarged bud-like organs.

Throughout the region in alpine meadows and slopes above 6000 feet
elevation.

[Sidenote: =Lycopodium annotinum= L. _Stiff Club-moss._]

Stems much branched, slender, prostrate and creeping, rather stiff, 1—4
feet long, the branches similar, ascending 5—8 inches high, sparingly
forked; leaves uniform, spreading, 5-ranked, rigid, linear-lanceolate,
minutely serrulate, nerved below, spikes solitary or several at the
ends of the branches, oblong, cylindric 1—1½ inches long, composed of
ovate or ovate-cordate, short-acuminate and denticulate bracts, each
with a sporange in its axil.

In woods throughout the region, frequent.

[Sidenote: =Lycopodium clavatum= L. _Running Pine._]

Stems extensively creeping, 1—4 feet long with similar short, irregular
ascending or decumbent, densely leafy branches; leaves much crowded,
many-ranked, incurved, linear-subulate, bristle-tipped, the lower
denticulate, the upper nearly entire or slightly decurrent on either
side; spikes 1—4 on long peduncles; bracts membranous, roundish, and
irregularly denticulate below.

In dry woods and open grounds, rather rare in the region, observed only
in the Selkirks around Glacier and Roger’s Pass.

[Sidenote: =Lycopodium sitchensis= Rupr. _Arctic Club-moss._]

Stems prostrate, 8—12 inches long, on or a little beneath the
surface; sending up frequent branched stems which form compact masses
of vertical, compressed branches 2—3 inches high, with occasional
stronger, spike-bearing branches; leaves lanceolate with a broad base,
spreading and curving upwards, thick, entire, acute, in five rows on
the branchlets; the spikes nearly sessile.

On grassy alpine slopes 6000 feet and upwards in the Selkirks,
especially in the region about Glacier.

[Sidenote: =Lycopodium complanatum= L. _Trailing Christmas-green._]

Stems extensively creeping, with erect or ascending reinform or
fan-shaped branches, several times forked above with crowded flattened
branchlets; leaves minute, overlapping, flattened, 4-ranked, the
lateral row with somewhat spreading tips; peduncle slender, 2—6 inches
high, forked, bearing 2—4 linear-cylindric spikes, bracts broadly
ovate, acuminate, with pale irregularly cut margins.

In mossy woods at the lower altitudes, more or less frequent throughout
the region, especially in the Rockies.

[Sidenote: =Lycopodium alpinum= L. _Alpine Club-moss._]

Stems prostrate, 8—20 inches long on or near the surface of the ground,
forming numerous, several times branched clusters 2—3 inches high with
glaucous leaves, and occasional stouter, compressed spike-bearing
stems, extending above the others; leaves 4-ranked, erect, flattened,
those of the lateral rows two to three times larger than those
intermediate; spikes sessile, few, ½—¾ of an inch long.

In alpine meadows, on slopes, and in open woods throughout the region
from 6000 feet upwards.




SELAGINELLACEÆ

_Selaginella Family_


Moss-like plants with branching stems and scale-like leaves which are
many ranked and uniform, or 4-ranked and of two types spreading in two
planes. Sporanges solitary in the axils of the leaves which are so
arranged as to form more or less quadrangular spikes.

[Sidenote: =Selaginella selaginoides= (L.) Link. _Low Selaginella._]

Sterile stems, prostrate and creeping, small and slender; fertile
stems thicker, ascending, simple 1—3 inches high; leaves lanceolate,
acute, spreading, sparsely spinulose-ciliate; spikes solitary at the
ends of the fertile branches, bracts lax, ascending lanceolate or
ovate-lanceolate, strongly fringed.

A light green moss-like plant growing in wet sandy grounds in the
Rockies; not infrequent.

[Sidenote: =Selaginella densa= Rydb.]

Densely tufted sterile branches very short and crowded; leaves, densely
crowded, many-ranked linear or needle-shaped in age, slightly flattened
and grooved on the upper side, the margin fringed, tipped with a white
bristle; fertile branches erect, the spikes quadrangular ½—¾ of an
inch long, bracts folded together, thick, triangular-ovate, fringed on
the margin and tipped with a white bristle half as long as that of the
leaves.

In sterile dry ground and on exposed rocks throughout the region from
the bases to the tops of the highest mountains, forming grayish-green
mats on the ground.




PINACEÆ.

_Pine Family_


Resinous trees and shrubs mostly with evergreen, narrow, entire or
scale-like leaves; the pollen sacks and ovules borne in separate
spikes; fruit a cone with numerous, several or few, woody, papery or
fleshy scales, sometimes berry-like; seed wingless or winged.

    Scales of the fruit numerous, alternate; leaf-buds scaly.

    Leaves in clusters.
       Clusters ensheathed at the base, containing 2, 3, or 5 leaves.
                                                                =Pinus.=
    Clusters not ensheathed at the base containing many leaves. =Larix.=
    Leaves solitary.
       Cones erect; scales deciduous.                           =Abies.=
       Cones pendent; scales persistent.
          Branchlets smooth; bracts 3-toothed.            =Pseudotsuga.=
          Branchlets roughened by the persistent leaf bases.
             Leaves petioled, not pungent.                      =Tsuga.=
             Leaves sessile, pungent.                           =Picea.=

    Scales of the fruit few, opposite; leaf-buds naked.
       Fruit fleshy and berry-like.                         =Juniperus.=
       Fruit a dry cone.                                        =Thuja.=

[Sidenote: =Pinus albicaulis= Engelm. _White-bark Pine._]

A tree 20 or 30 feet high generally with a short trunk 2—4 feet in
diameter, stout, very flexible branches, often standing nearly erect
and forming an open irregular broad head; often a low shrub and nearly
prostrate at high altitudes; bark thin with creamy-white plate-like
scales; leaves stout, rigid, slightly incurved, clustered at the ends
of the branches 1½—2½ inches long; cones oval or subglobose horizontal,
sessile, dark purple, 1½—3 inches long with thickened acute scales.

[Illustration: Pinus albicaulis Engelm. (¼ Nat.) White Pine.]

[Illustration: Pinus Murrayana Oreg. Com. (¼ Nat.) Jack Pine.]

On alpine slopes and exposed ridges from 5000 feet elevation upward,
occurring occasionally in the Rockies, but frequent throughout the
Selkirks at or near the timber line.

[Sidenote: =Pinus Murrayana= Oreg. Com. _Black Pine, Jack Pine._]

A tree 40—80 feet high with a trunk 1—3 feet in diameter, slender,
strict; branches frequently persistent nearly to the base of the stem,
somewhat pendulous below, ascending near the top of the tree, forming a
pyramidal spire-topped head; bark thin, close, light orange-brown with
appressed scales; leaves 2 in a bundle, yellowish-green, 1—3 inches
long, stout; cones yellowish-brown and shining oval to sub-cylindric
oblique at the base, often clustered ¾—2 inches long, with slightly
concave scales with slender deciduous prickles.

The most abundant tree at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies,
frequently covering vast tracts, and rising on the mountain sides to
6000 feet or occasionally higher.

[Sidenote: =Larix Lyallii= Parl. _Lyall’s Larch._]

A tree usually 40—50 feet high with a diameter of 18—20 inches and
remote, elongated, tough, persistent, nearly black branches, with
prominent winter buds with conspicuous long white matted hairs fringing
the margins of their scales and often nearly concealing the buds;
bark on the old trunks ½ to ¾ of an inch thick, pale gray, divided
into shallow irregular plates; leaves many in a cluster, 4-angled,
slender, blue-green 1—1½ inches long; young cones showy with dark red
or yellow-green scales and dark purple bracts; when mature, ovate 1½—2
inches long with reddish-purple scales and long tipped dark purple
bracts.

[Illustration: Larix Lyallii Parl. (⅓ Nat.) Lyall’s Larch.]

[Illustration: Thuja plicata Don. (⅓ Nat.) Giant Cedar.]

An alpine tree occurring with more or less frequency throughout the
Rockies from Banff to Field, from 6000 to 8000 feet elevation, at or
near the tree limit, often much stunted and almost shrub-like; very
abundant on the mountains in the region about Lake Louise.

[Sidenote: =Abies lasiocarpa= (Hook) Nutt. _Sub-alpine Fir, Balsam
Fir._]

A tree usually 40—100 feet high with a trunk 1—5 feet in diameter,
short crowded tough branches, usually slightly pendulous near the
base and forming dense spire-like slender heads; bark rough on the
older trees, with thick, appressed, cinnamon-red scales; leaves pale
blue-green flat, 1—1¾ inches long on the lower branches, rounded or
notched at the apex; on the upper branches thickened, not more than ½
an inch long, flattened and closely appressed with long rigid points;
cones, oblong-cylindric, rounded, truncate or depressed at the narrowed
apex, dark purple and soft-hairy, 1½—4 inches long with scales
gradually narrowed from the broad rounded apex to the base, about 3
times as long as the bracts.

This tree the Balsam of the region is found throughout on the higher
mountain slopes and summits, frequently forming the timber line in
which case it is shrub-like and stunted.

[Sidenote: =Pseudotsuga mucronata= (Raf.) Sudw. _Douglas Spruce, Red
Fir._]

A magnificent tree 80—100 feet high, with a trunk 2—3 feet in diameter,
or frequently larger, with slender crowded branches and long pendulous
lateral ones forming, while the tree is young, an open pyramid, soon
deciduous from the trees crowded in the forest and leaving the bare
trunk naked for ⅔ of its height and surmounted by a comparatively
small, narrow head; bark on the young trees, smooth, dark gray-brown
and lustrous, on the old trunks several inches thick, divided into
oblong plates broken into irregularly connected ridges; leaves crowded,
yellowish-green, straight or slightly curved, narrow, ¾—1¼ inches long,
obtuse or acute at the apex; cones pendent on long stout stems, 2—4¼
inches long, with thin slightly concave scales; bracts often extending
half an inch beyond the scales.

[Illustration: Abies lasiocarpa (Hook.) Nutt. (⅓ Nat.) Balsam Fir.]

[Illustration: Pseudotsuga mucronata (Raf.) Sudw. (¼ Nat.) Douglas
Fir.]

Throughout the Rockies in the lower wooded valleys, the handsomest tree
of this section especially when young, now rather rare in the mature
state along the line of the railway, but may be so seen to perfection
in the Yoho and some of the other outlying valleys.

[Sidenote: =Tsuga heterophylla= (Raf.) Sarg. _Western Hemlock._]

A tree frequently 200 feet high, with a trunk 6—10 feet in diameter,
with short slender usually pendulous branches forming a narrow
pyramidal head; bark orange-brown, thin when young, an inch or more
thick on mature trees and divided into broad flat ridges; leaves flat,
dark green and lustrous on the upper surface, marked below by broad
white bands; cones sessile, oblong or oval, ¾—1 inch long with few
yellowish-brown oblong scales abruptly contracted at the middle and
purplish toward the base.

Abundant throughout the Selkirks.

[Sidenote: =Tsuga Mertensiana= (Bong.) Carr. _Mountain Hemlock._]

Tree usually 70—100 feet high with a tapering trunk 2—5 feet in
diameter and gracefully pendent slender branches and drooping lateral
ones; bark grayish and scaly, on mature trees 1—1½ inches thick divided
into rounded ridges with closely appressed cinnamon scales; leaves more
or less in clusters, standing out all over the sides of the branches,
rounded, light bluish-green or in some pale blue ½—1 inch long;
cones sessile, cylindric, oblong, narrowed toward the blunt apex and
somewhat toward the base, pendulous, 1—3 inches long, with thin scales
usually as broad as long, with slightly thickened or erose margins,
purplish-brown, 4 times as long as the sharp, purple bract.

On the slopes and exposed ridges through the Selkirks, a most
attractive tree.

[Illustration: Tsuga Mertensiana (Bong.) Carr. (⅔ Nat.) Mountain
Hemlock.]

[Illustration: Tsuga heterophylla (Raf.) Sarg. (⅙ Nat.) Hemlock.]

[Sidenote: =Picea Albertiana= S. Brown. _Alberta Spruce._]

A tree 30—60 feet high, slender, strict; twigs smooth and shining or
occasionally glandular, hairy, but never glaucous, yellowish-brown when
young becoming darker with age, leaf bases long and standing out at
right angles from the stem; leaves pale blue or blue-green, ½—1 inch
long, nearly straight or curved, acute or with a rigid tip, 4-sided;
cones ovate or oblong, bright crimson when young, at maturity 1—1½
inches long and nearly as broad when expanded, scales stiff and rigid,
broadly rounded at the apex, entire, broader than long, cinnamon brown
with a chestnut edging; bract very small with a sharply angular tip.

The common spruce in the lower valleys and river bottoms throughout the
Rockies.

[Sidenote: =Picea Engelmanni= (Parry) Engelm. _Engelmann’s Spruce._]

A tree often 150 feet high but usually much lower, with a trunk
reaching 4—5 feet in diameter; spreading branches, produced in regular
whorls and forming a narrow compact pyramidal head, and gracefully
hanging short lateral branches; bark when mature reddish-brown and
broken into thin scales; leaves soft and flexible, slender or slightly
incurved, stouter on the fertile branches, ½—1⅛ inches long, glaucous
when young, becoming dark blue-green; cones oblong-cylindric, 1—2
inches long, lustrous, light chestnut brown with thin flexible
wedge-shaped scales, with erosedentate margins.

On the higher mountain slopes in the Rockies, but much lower in the
valleys of the Selkirks, where it grows to a great size.

[Sidenote: =Juniperus Siberica= Burgs. _Alpine Juniper._]

A depressed rigid shrub, with many slender, decumbent stems, curving
upward and forming a circular mass frequently 10 feet in diameter and
18 inches high; bark reddish-brown; leaves numerous ⅓—½ an inch long,
awl-shaped, rigid, spreading nearly at right angles to the branches,
linear-lanceolate, acute, and tipped with sharp, slender points;
channelled and whitened above, lustrous green beneath; berry-like
cones, blue and glaucous, subglobose or oblong about ¼ of an inch in
diameter.

On dry hills and stony slopes throughout the region.

[Illustration: Picea albertiana S. Brown. (½ Nat.) Alberta Spruce.]

[Illustration: Picea albertiana S. Brown. (½ Nat.) Alberta Spruce.]

[Sidenote: =Juniperus prostrata= Pers. _Shrubby Red Cedar._]

A depressed, creeping shrub seldom more than a foot high, with
spreading branches; bark grayish-brown; leaves scale-like, appressed,
4-ranked, acute, with a short spiny point; berry-like cones, light blue
and glaucous, a third of an inch in diameter.

On dry stony ground and slopes throughout the Rockies.

[Sidenote: =Thuja plicata= Don. _Giant Cedar._]

A tree frequently 200 feet high with a broad, gradually tapering
buttressed base sometimes 15 feet in diameter; branches short,
horizontal, usually pendulous at the ends, bright yellow-green
during the first year, becoming reddish-brown and lustrous; bark
thin, cinnamon-red, divided into broad rounded ridges by shallow
fissures; leaves ovate, long pointed, ¼ of an inch long or less;
cones purplish-brown, much reflexed, clustered at the ends of the
branches, ½ inch long with 6 oblong thin leathery scales with thickened
spine-bearing tips.

Occasionally met with in the lower valleys on the western slope of the
Rockies; becoming an immense forest tree in the moist valleys of the
Selkirks where it forms a striking feature of the landscape.




TAXACEÆ

_Yew Family_


Trees or shrubs with narrow flat evergreen or deciduous leaves and a
drupe-like fruit.

[Sidenote: =Taxus brevifolia= Nutt. _Western Yew._]

A small straggling tree or shrub seldom over 20 feet high and up
to 12 inches in diameter; bark thin, covered with greenish-purple
scales; leaves about ½ an inch long, linear-lanceolate, flat, dark
yellowish-green above, paler below with stout midribs and rigid points;
fruit a fleshy crimson disc ⅓ of an inch long and as broad, surrounding
the hard, nearly black, depressed seed.

Occurs locally in the Selkirks, forming much of the underwood on Beaver
Creek.




ARACEÆ

_Arum Family_


Smooth perennial herbs with tuberous or corn-like rootstocks and mostly
basal, large showy leaves; flowers small and numerously crowded on a
spadix which is generally surrounded or subtended by a simple showy
leaf-like organ called a spathe.

A very numerous family found mostly in the tropics and represented in
our region by but a single species.

[Sidenote: =Lysichiton kamtschatcense= (L.) Schott. _Western Skunk
Cabbage._]

A stemless marsh plant with large leaves 1—4 feet long, 3—18 inches
wide, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, acute, narrowed below into a short
petiole. Flowers appearing before the leaves; spathe yellow with a
broad acute blade 2—6 inches long, narrowed below to a sheathing
petiole 3—10 inches long; spadix 2—4 inches long, densely flowered, on
a stout peduncle 8 inches or more long.

In wet and marshy spots through the Selkirks. Very abundant near Bear
Creek Station on the railway, flowering in early spring.




MELANTHACEÆ

_Bunch-Flower Family_


Lily-like plants with leafy stems, usually with tufts of grass-like
leaves at the base and rootstocks or occasionally bulbs.

The flowers small and distinctly 6-parted, with the same number of
stamens and three styles; the flowers grow in close heads at the top of
the stems.

    Anthers, 1-celled.
       Leaves broad, petioles sheathing.                     =Veratrum.=
       Leaves grass-like.
          Flowers erect with a gland at the base of each petal.
                                                            =Zygadenus.=
          Flowers nodding, petals without glands.        =Stenanthella.=
    Anthers, 2-celled.                                      =Tofieldia.=

[Sidenote: =Veratrum viride= Ait. _American White Hellebore._]

Stem 2—8 feet high, very leafy, softly hairy especially above. Leaves
dark green above, paler and hairy beneath, prominently veiny and
sheathing at the base, oval or elliptic, acute, 6—12 inches long,
3—6 inches broad, the upper becoming successively narrower. Flowers
yellowish-green, numerous in a spreading head often 2 feet long, with
drooping branches; perianth segments oblong or oblanceolate, acute, ¼—½
an inch long, twice as long as the stamens.

In swamps and on moist slopes and stream borders throughout the region,
frequently growing in great masses. In the Rockies it seldom grows
below 6000 feet elevation, but is found much lower in the moist valley
of the Selkirks.

[Sidenote: =Zygadenus elegans= Pursh. _Tall Zygadenus._]

Very glaucous throughout, with a cluster of narrow, grass-like leaves
5—10 inches long and ¼ inch broad, from a chaffy bulbous root; stem
whitish-green or purplish, 1—2 feet high, with scattered, purple,
leaf-like bracts and an open head of flowers 4—12 inches long; flowers
greenish-white, open, ½ an inch or more across the six petals and
sepals with a large, bright green gland at the base; stamens 6, erect,
forming a central column, anthers scarlet on the opening of the bud,
changing to yellow; styles 3.

Throughout the Rockies up to 6000 or 7000 feet elevation, in all kinds
of situations and soils, a most attractive plant worthy, of a place in
the flower-garden, blossoming during midsummer.

[Illustration: Zygadenus elegans Pursh. (½ Nat.) Tall Zygadenus.]

[Illustration: Zygadenus gramineus Rydb. (½ Nat.) Zygadenus.]

[Sidenote: =Zygadenus gramineus= Rydb. _Grass-like Zygadenus._]

A slender, yellowish-green plant 8—12 inches high, from an elongated
ovoid bulb. Leaves narrow and grass-like, rough on the margins and
midribs, all with sheaths around the stem. Flowers light yellow, ¼ of
an inch broad in a compact head 2—3 inches long; stamens exserted,
anthers yellow.

On open grassy hillsides in the Rockies from Banff to Castle Mountain,
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Stenanthella occidentalis= (A. Gray) Rydb. _Stenthium._]

Smooth 12—18 inches high from a bulbous base. Leaves 2—3 from the same
root, 8—10 inches long, ½ an inch broad, spreading. Flowers 6—20,
greenish-purple, ½ an inch long, open, drooping, in a simple slender
head; sepals and petals 3 each, with recurved tips; stamens 6, included.

In moist woods throughout the Rockies, growing in moss; the dark green,
widely spreading leaves and wand-like stem of drooping bell-like
flowers, making a graceful and attractive plant during early summer.

[Sidenote: =Tofieldia palustris= Huds. _Scottish Asphodel._]

Low with numerous tufted grass-like leaves 1—2 inches long. Flowers
6-parted, minute, greenish-white in a compact oblong head ¼ of an inch
long, elongated in fruiting; stamens 6; anthers yellow not exceeding
the perianth; head of flowers borne on a slender, smooth stem 3—7
inches high.

Abundant throughout the Rockies in damp sandy or gravelly ground, on
the flood-plains and banks of rivers and streams and on the gravelly
shores of lakes and ponds; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Tofieldia intermedia= Rydb. _False Asphodel._]

Plant with a cluster of grass-like leaves, 3—8 inches long and about
¼ of an inch broad, yellowish-green, from an oblique and chaffy
rootstock. Flowers few, less than ¼ of an inch long, pale yellow,
6-parted, on very short pedicels; stamens 6, slightly exserted, with
purple anthers; the whole in a compact head about ½ an inch long, on a
stem 8—10 inches high, with sticky hairs near the top.

[Illustration: _a_ Stenanthella occidentalis (A. Gray) Rydb.

Stenanthium.

_b_ Clintonia uniflora Kunth. Clintonia. (⅔ Nat.)]

Frequent throughout the region at an altitude of 4000 to 5000 feet, in
wet open situations with shallow soil; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Tofieldia occidentalis= S. Wats. _Western False Asphodel._]

Similar to the preceding but readily distinguished by its taller stem
and more open head of flowers, with longer sepals and pedicels, which
are twice as long in each case.

In the Selkirks only, but frequent there in the bogs around Roger’s
Pass.




LILIACEÆ

_Lily Family_


Plants with bulbs or corms but never rootstocks; leaves either at the
base or in whorls or pairs on the stem; the flowers brightly coloured,
frequently large, borne singly or in clusters at the summit of the
frequently naked stem, the six parts though usually distinct, sometimes
more or less united into a tube; stamens 6; stigma 3-lobed.

    Bracts of the inflorescence thin and translucent.       =Allium.=
    Bracts of the inflorescence leaf-like or none.
        Bulbs scaly.                                        =Lilium.=
        Bulbs corm-like.                               =Erythronium.=

[Sidenote: =Allium recurvatum= Rydb. _Wild Onion, Garlic._]

Plant 12—15 inches high with an oblique base from an oblong-ovoid bulb.
Leaves narrow and grass-like, 6—8 inches long, thick and half rounded
on the back, the old ones persistent and forming a mat at the surface
of the ground. Flowers numerous, on slender pedicels, in a nodding
terminal head; sepals and petals ¼ of an inch long, elliptic-ovate and
obtuse, rosy pink with a darker mid-vein; stamens and styles exserted,
anthers pale yellow.

Frequent throughout the Rockies on dry grassy or stony slopes and
slides; flowering in June.

[Illustration: Tofieldia intermedia Rydb. (⅔ Nat.) False Asphodel.]

[Illustration: Vagnera stellata (L.) Morong. (¼ Nat.)

Star-Flowered Solomon’s Seal.]

[Sidenote: =Allium sibericum= L. _Northern Garlic._]

Stem 1—2 feet high from a narrowly ovoid bulb, with a single,
elongated, round, hollow, basal leaf and 1 or 2 similar leaves on the
stem. Flowers numerous in a compact round head; the sepals and petals
about ½ an inch long, slender, with a tapering tip, bright rose-purple
with a darker mid-vein; stamens much shorter than the perianth segments.

Not infrequent in moist open places throughout the Rockies; flowering
in July.

[Sidenote: =Lilium montanum.= A. Nelson. _Mountain-Lily._]

Stem 12—18 inches high, rather stout, from a depressed globose bulb an
inch in diameter. Leaves alternate except the uppermost which are in a
whorl of 5—7, dark green above, paler beneath, minutely roughened on
the edges, lanceolate, tapering but slightly toward the sessile base.
Flowers erect usually one, but sometimes several, on a stem; sepals and
petals 2½ inches long, somewhat spreading, elliptic-oblong, tapering
gradually toward both ends, the base contracted into a claw, which is
less than ⅓ the length of the blade; blade reddish-orange on the inner
face, paler near the base, which is dotted with numerous purplish-black
spots; outer face less brilliant, largely suffused with green; stamens
and stigma purplish.

Frequent throughout the Rockies on the edges of woods and in the lower
river valleys; very abundant in early July in the valley of the Lower
Kicking Horse and Columbia rivers from Golden to Donald.

[Sidenote: =Erythronium grandiflorum= Pursh. _Snow Lily._]

A foot or more high from a deep-rooted, slender, membranous-coated
corm. Leaves 2 or occasionally 3, opposite or in a whorl, broadly
lanceolate, obtuse, 6—8 inches long, 2—3 inches wide, unequal, dull and
glaucous green. Flowers 1—6, nodding, bright yellow, sepals and petals
lanceolate 2 inches long, tapering to a slender, strongly reflexed tip;
stamens exserted, anthers yellow or purplish-brown.

[Illustration: Erythronium grandiflorum Pursh. (½ Nat.) Snow Lily.]

This beautiful lily is frequent on the slides and mountain slopes
throughout the region at an elevation of 5000 feet or higher, appearing
immediately after the snows have melted, and lasting but a short time.
It may be found flowering according to the elevation and condition of
the snow, from May throughout the summer. The plant has derived its
common name no doubt from its habit of blooming so close to the melting
snows. Where the plant occurs it is usually found in great numbers
during the brief flowering period.




CONVALLARIACEÆ

_Lily-of-the-Valley Family_


Resembling the lilies, sometimes with naked but usually leafy stems,
and simple or branched, frequently creeping rootstocks, flowers usually
small and variously disposed on the stem, either scattered in the
axils of the leaves or in terminal clusters, or occasionally solitary
on a naked stem; either 4- or 6-parted, regular, perfect; stamens 6.

    Plant producing but one flower.                     =Clintonia.=
    Plant producing several flowers.
       Flowers in a raceme or panicle.                    =Vagnera.=
       Flowers in an umbel or solitary.
          Flowers terminal on the branches.              =Disporum.=
          Flowers axillary.
             Perianth narrowly campanulate.            =Streptopus.=
             Perianth rotate.                             =Kruhsea.=

[Sidenote: =Clintonia uniflora= (Schult.) Kunth. _Clintonia._]

More or less hairy throughout, with 1 to 3 or 4 dark green leaves,
4—8 inches long and 1—2 inches wide, oblong-lanceolate with an abrupt
tip, and tapering at the base to sheathing petioles, from a creeping
underground stem 2—3 inches long. Flower-stem shorter than the leaves
with one or rarely two blossoms which are pure white, very open,
6-parted; sepals and petals ¾—1 inch long, oblanceolate, obtuse;
stamens 6, shorter than the petals, anthers yellow.

In rich, moist woods throughout the region.

[Illustration: Lilium montanum A. Nelson. (½ Nat.) Red Mountain-Lily.]

[Illustration: Kruhsea streptopoides (Ledeb.) Kearney. (½ Nat.)
Kruhsea.]

[Sidenote: =Vagnera stellata= (L.) Morong. _Star-flowered Solomon’s
Seal._]

Glaucous throughout, 8—20 inches high, smooth or with a few short
hairs, leafy from a stout fleshy root; leaves alternate, 2—5 inches
long, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, with a clasping base,
smooth and bright green above, glaucous and minutely hairy beneath.
Flowers white, several forming a rather open terminal head. 1—2 inches
long; petals and sepals narrow, ¼ to ⅜ of an inch long; stamens 6,
about half their length, anthers nearly white.

Common throughout the region in moist words and thickets; flowering
through June and July.

[Sidenote: =Vagnera amplexicaulis= (Nutt.) Greene. _False Solomon’s
Seal._]

Tall, stout, and leafy, 18—30 inches high, from a fleshy rootstock;
stem striate and slightly hairy especially near the top; leaves
alternate, sessile or short-petioled, ovate or oblong, 3—7 inches
long, 1½—3 inches broad, short, acuminate, often with a twisted tip.
Flowers small, yellowish-white in a close terminal head 1½—3½ inches
long; petals and sepals minute, about ¹/₁₆ of an inch long; stamens 6,
the filaments petaloid and about ⅛ of an inch long, anthers yellowish
white.

Common throughout the region in the moist rich woods; flowering during
June.

[Sidenote: =Streptopus amplexifolius= (L.) DC. _Tall Twisted-stalk._]

Plant 1—3 feet high, from a short, stout rootstock, covered with
numerous fibrous roots; stem glaucous, usually branching below the
middle, smooth above and covered with stiff hairs below. Leaves
alternate, ovate-lanceolate, 2—5 inches long, 1—2 inches wide,
acuminate, smooth, bright green above, glaucous beneath, heart-shaped
and clasping at the base. Flowers numerous, 1 or 2 on a stem at the
back of each of the upper leaves, stem bent or twisted about the
middle; sepals and petals greenish-white or yellowish, narrowly
lanceolate about ½ an inch long, spreading and turned back at the tips;
berry ½—¾ of an inch in diameter, globose, yellow or bright scarlet.

A rather striking plant throughout the region in the moist rich woods
among rocks; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Streptopus curvipes= A. M. Vail. _Smaller Twisted-stalk._]

Plant 6—24 inches high, smooth except the flower-stalks and
margins of the leaves, simple or slightly branched from a slender
creeping rhizome, with a few fibrous rootlets at the nodes. Leaves
yellowish-green, sessile, oval or oblong-lanceolate, 1—3 inches long,
acuminate at the tip and rounded or more or less clasping at the
base, the margins more or less scatteringly glandular-hairy. Flowers
few at the backs of the upper leaves, solitary on glandular-hairy,
curved stalks ¼—¾ of an inch long; sepals and petals pale purple or
rose colour, darker spotted on the inner surface, slender, slightly
more than ¼ of an inch long; anthers beaked, the beaks slender; berry
globose, about ⅜ of an inch in diameter, bright red.

In the damp woods in the Selkirks, frequent, growing in colonies and
spreading largely by the creeping rhizomes.

[Sidenote: =Kruhsea streptopoides= (Ledeb.) Kearney. _Kruhsea._]

Smooth and simple, 3—6 inches high, from an extensively creeping
rhizome, with a few fibrous roots at each node. Leaves 4—8, bright
green and shining on both surfaces, ovate-lanceolate, acute, 1—2
inches long, the upper merely sessile, the lower clasping at the base.
Flowers few, about ¼ of an inch in width, stellate and solitary on very
slender, curved stalks about ⅜ of an inch long in the axils, at the
backs of the upper leaves; sepals and petals deep wine-colour at the
base, with yellowish-green reflexed tips; stamens 6, anthers ovoid,
2-lobed, yellow and prominent, slightly below the centre of the sepals
and petals; ovary broadly urn-shaped; style none; berry nearly globose
at maturity and bright red.

Known only in the Selkirks where it occurs in colonies of considerable
size in the rich woods at Glacier; flowering in the middle of June.

[Sidenote: =Disporum Oreganum= (S. Wats.) B. and H. _Disporum._]

Stem 1—3 feet high, much branched and finely hairy above. Leaves
yellowish-green when young, becoming darker with age, ovate or oblong,
acuminate, distinctly heart-shaped at the base, 2—4 inches long,
hairy, especially beneath. Flowers appearing as the leaves unfold
greenish-yellow or nearly white, drooping 1 or 2 together at the ends
of the branches; sepals and petals spreading half an inch or more in
length, lanceolate and narrowed at the base into a broad claw; stamens
exserted, anthers yellow; style simple, larger than the stamens; berry
ovate, half an inch in diameter, smooth or nearly so when ripe, bright
red and few-seeded.

In moist rich woods throughout the region, most abundant on the
western slope of the Rockies and in the Selkirks; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Disporum majus= (Hook). Britton. _Large Flowered Disporum._]

Plant 1—2 feet high with few branches, hairy when young. Leaves ovate
or oblong-lanceolate, acute or short, acuminate, rounded at the base.
Flowers greenish-yellow or nearly white, 1—3 together at the ends of
the branches; sepals and petals not spreading, half an inch or less in
length, narrowly oblong or oblanceolate, stamens about equalling the
sepals and petals; style slightly longer than the stamens, 3-cleft;
berry a little less than half an inch in diameter, depressed, globose,
and roughened with short papillæ.

In rich woods, most abundant on the eastern slopes of the Rockies;
flowering early in June.




IRIDACEÆ

_Iris Family_


Perennial herbs with narrow 2-ranked, grass-like leaves and mostly
clustered, perfect flowers, subtended by bracts; perianth of 6
segments, rolled together in the bud, stamens 3, inserted on the
perianth opposite its outer series of lobes; filaments slender, distant
or united; anthers facing upward.

[Sidenote: =Sisyrinchium septentrionale= Bicknell. _Blue-eyed Grass._]

Growing in small tufts, 4—10 inches high, pale, glaucous. Leaves stiff
and very slender about half the length of the taller scapes, equalling
the shorter ones. Spathe small purplish or green, often partly double
and enclosing 3 or 4 small bright violet-blue flowers, less than half
an inch broad, on erect pedicels.

Throughout the Rockies in open moist ground at the lower elevations;
flowering in June.




ORCHIDACEÆ

_Orchid Family_


Perennial herbs, with corms, bulbs, or tuberous roots, sheathing entire
leaves, sometimes reduced to scales, the flowers perfect, irregular,
bracted, solitary, spiked or racemed. Perianth superior of 6 segments,
the 3 outer (sepals) similar or nearly so, 2 of the inner ones (petals)
lateral, alike; the third inner one (lip) dissimilar, often markedly
so, usually larger and often spurred; stamens and style variously
arranged. An extensive family with great diversity of flower form,
and habit of growth. Most abundant in the tropics, represented in the
region as follows:

    Perfect anthers 2; lip large, sac-like.           =Cypripedium.=
    Perfect anther 1.
       Plants saprophytic, without green herbage.    =Corallorhiza.=
       Plants with ordinary green herbage.
          Flower and leaf solitary; root bulbous.        =Cytherea.=
          Flowers several to many in racemes.
             Leaf only 1.
                Flowers white with purple spots.           =Orchis.=
                Flowers greenish.                        =Lysiella.=
             Leaves only 2, cauline.                       =Ophrys.=
             Leaves more than 2.
                Stem leaves reduced to bracts.
                   Basal leaves white veined.            =Peramium.=
                Stem leaves not reduced to bracts.
                   Flowers not spirally arranged.
                      Glands surrounded by a thin membrane.
                                                      =Cœloglossum.=
                      Glands naked.                    =Limnorchis.=
                   Flowers spirally arranged.             =Ibidium.=

[Illustration: _a_ Cypripedium passerinum Rich. Small White Lady’s
Slipper.]

[Illustration: _b_ Cypripedium parviflorum Salisb. Small Yellow Lady’s
Slipper.

(⅔Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Cypripedium passerinum= Rich. _Small White Lady’s Slipper._]

Stem 8—10 inches high from a decumbent base, leafy, hairy throughout.
Leaves 4 or 5, lanceolate, acuminate, veiny, 3—4 inches long,
yellowish-green, and clasping at the base. Flowers solitary, small;
lip obovate, inflated half an inch long, white, spotted with purple
inside, particularly near the base; sepals greenish, shorter than
the lip, the upper forming a sort of hood; the lateral petals white,
oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, half an inch long, spreading.

In damp shaded situations, frequent in the Rockies; flowers in July.

[Sidenote: =Cypripedium parviflorum= Salisb. _Small Yellow Lady’s
Slipper._]

Stem 1—2 feet high, slender, and leafy. Leaves elliptic or lanceolate,
2—6 inches long, 1—2¼ inches wide, yellowish-green, veiny,
scatteringly hairy. Flowers usually solitary, bright yellow; lip
inflated, curved, an inch or more long, spotted and blotched inside
with purple; sepals and petals longer than the lip, laterals twisted,
1½—2 inches long, lanceolate with an attenuate tip, yellowish-green or
sometimes purplish.

Not uncommon in the Rockies in moist ground, very abundant on the
torrent fan among loose stones at the head of Emerald Lake; flowering
in June.

[Sidenote: =Corallorhiza Corallorhiza= (L.) Karst. _Early Coral-root._]

Stem smooth, greenish-yellow or purplish; 4—12 inches high from a mass
of coral-like roots. Leaves absent but represented by 2—5 closely
sheathing scales. Flowers 3—12 in a head 1—3 inches long; sepals and
petals slender, ¼ of an inch long, yellowish or dull purplish; lip not
quite as long as the petals, white or whitish, oblong, nearly entire or
slightly notched at the apex, 2-toothed at the base, occasionally with
purple spots.

[Illustration: Corallorhiza Corallorhiza (L.) Karst. (½ Nat.)
Coral-Root.]

[Illustration: Lyschiton kamtschatcense (L.) Schott. (¼ Nat.) Western
Skunk-Cabbage.]

Frequent in woods in the Rockies especially those of the “Jack Pine,”
flowering in May and early June.

[Sidenote: =Corallorhiza multiflora= Nutt. _Large Coral-root._]

Stems 8—20 inches high, purplish, with several appressed scales.
Flowers 10—30 in a head 2—8 inches long, brownish-purple ½—¾ of an inch
long; sepals and petals linear-lanceolate, about ⅓ of an inch long; lip
white, spotted and lined with purple, oval in outline, deeply 3-lobed,
the middle lobe broadest; spur manifest and yellowish.

Not infrequent in the rich woods in the Selkirks; flowering in late
summer.

[Sidenote: =Cytherea bulbosa= (L.) House. _Calypso._]

Stem 3—6 inches high, purplish, from a bulb nearly half an inch in
diameter. Leaf solitary, dark, lustrous green, 1—1½ inches long, round,
ovate, obtusely pointed at the apex, rounded or somewhat heart-shaped
at the base, deeply veined. Flower solitary, nodding, an inch long,
rosy purple variegated with pink and yellow; petals and sepals linear,
erect or spreading, half an inch or more long with longitudinal purple
lines; lip ¾ of an inch long, sac-like and spreading, divided into
two below, with a prominent patch of yellow hairs near the point of
division.

This charming little orchid, by far the most dainty of any found in the
region, is frequent, growing in deep moss on the shaded slopes of the
Rockies; very fragrant, flowering in early June.

[Sidenote: =Orchis rotundifolia= Pursh. _Round-leaved Orchid._]

Plant slender, 8—10 inches high with one leaf near the base, varying
from nearly orbicular to oval, 1½—3 inches long, 1—2 inches wide,
sheathing at the base. Spike 2—8 flowered; flowers half an inch or more
long; lateral sepals spreading, somewhat longer than the petals, petals
and sepals oval, rose-colour; lip white, purple-spotted, longer than
the petals, three-lobed, the middle longest, dilated and two-lobed or
notched at the tip; spur slender, shorter than the lip.

This beautiful little orchid is abundant throughout the Rockies in cool
mossy spots and rich woods; flowering in June.

[Illustration: _a_ Cytherea bulbosa (L.) House. (¾ Nat.)

Calypso.

_b_ Orchis rotundifolia Pursh. Small Round-Leaved Orchid.]

[Sidenote: =Lysiella obtusata= (Pursh.) Rydb. _Small Northern
Bog-orchid._]

Plant 6—8 inches high from a short thick rootstock; stem naked with
a single obovate or oblong leaf at the base 1½—2½ inches long, ½—1½
inches wide, obtuse. Flowers few in a slender spike, yellowish-green;
upper sepal round, ovate, erect, surrounding the broad column; lateral
sepals reflexed and spreading; petals lanceolate, smaller; lip entire,
linear-lanceolate, and deflexed; spur slightly curved especially at the
tip, shorter than the ovary.

Frequent throughout the Rockies in the lower valleys, in cool shaded
spots growing in moss, on the borders of streams, ponds, or lakes;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Ophrys nephrophylla= Rydb. _Heart-shaped Twayblade._]

Stem slender and smooth, 3—8 inches high. Leaves sessile, cordate or
broadly ovate, ½—1 inch long; head of flowers rather loose, ½—2 inches
long, 4—20-flowered; flowers very minute, purplish or greenish; sepals
ovate; petals oblong, about ¹/₁₆ of an inch long; lip two-cleft, twice
as long as the petals, the segments linear or hair-like.

This diminutive orchid is one of the commonest species throughout the
region in early summer, growing abundantly in mossy places in the moist
woods, frequently not rising more than an inch or two above the surface
of the ground; the flowers varying greatly in color from yellowish
green to purple.

[Sidenote: =Ophrys convallarioides= (Sw.) Wight. _Broad-lipped
Twayblade._]

Stem rather stout, 4—10 inches high, glandular-hairy above the leaves.
Leaves smooth, round, oval or ovate, obtuse, 3—9 nerved, 1—2½ inches
long, ½—1½ inches wide. Flowers 3—12 in a loose head, yellowish-green,
½ an inch long; bracts nearly ¼ of an inch long; sepals and petals
narrow and strongly reflexed in flower, much shorter than the lip;
lip nearly half an inch long, broadly wedge-shaped with two obtuse
lobes at the apex and with a tooth at each side of the narrow base;
column elongated but shorter than the lip, and incurved with two short
projecting wings above the anther.

In hemlock woods throughout the Selkirks; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Ophrys borealis= (Morong). _Northern Twayblade._]

Stems 3—5 inches high, smooth below, glandular and with long silky
scattered hairs among the flowers. Leaves oval, slightly sheathing,
obtuse, an inch or more long, half as broad, generally smooth. Flowers
few in a raceme; sepals and petals nearly equal, linear, obtuse, about
¼ of an inch long; lip half an inch long, obtuse at the apex with very
obtuse lobes. Yellowish-green with a purplish middle and purple nerves
radiating into the apical lobes, column slightly incurved, ⅛ of an inch
long.

Generally distributed throughout the Rockies but never abundant, seldom
more than 3 or 4 plants being found together; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Peramium Menziesi= (Lindl.) Morong. _Rattlesnake Plantain._]

Plant 8—15 inches high from a hairy, creeping rootstock. Leaves basal,
1½—2½ inches long and a third as broad, tapering to both ends, dark
green and veiny, sometimes blotched with white. Flowers ¼ to nearly ½
an inch long, yellowish- or greenish-white, in a slender spike; sepals
and petals lanceolate, erect or nearly so about half the length of the
lip, lip swollen at the base and with a long narrow recurved tip.

Frequent in rich woods throughout the region, growing in moss, the
evergreen leaves forming a rosette at the base of the stalk of flowers,
which blossom in August.

[Illustration: Limnorchis dilatatiformis Rydb. (⅙ Nat.)

Purplish-Green Bog-Orchid.]

[Illustration: Peramium Menziesii (Lindl.) Morong. (⅔ Nat.)

Menzies’ Rattlesnake Plantain.]

[Sidenote: =Peramium repens= (L.) Salisb. _Northern Rattlesnake
Plantain._]

Plant 6—10 inches high, glandular-hairy in the upper part of the stem.
Leaves oblong-lanceolate, an inch or more long and a third as wide,
tapering to both ends, green and usually blotched with white along the
veins. Flowers small in a one-sided spike, greenish-white, about ¼ of
an inch long, densely glandular-hairy on the outer surface; sepals and
petals erect, ovate; lip sac-like with a narrow recurved tip.

Frequent in the woods throughout the Rockies, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Cœloglossum bracteatum= (Willd.) Parl. _Long-bracted
Orchid._]

Stem stout and leafy, 6—18 inches high, from a root of numerous
fusiform tubers. Leaves lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, 2—4 inches
long. Flowers in a loose spike 2—3 inches long with bracts an inch
long; flowers yellowish-green, sepals ovate-lanceolate, dilated at the
base, ¼ of an inch long; petals very narrow or sometimes thread-like;
lip nearly half an inch long, oblong-spatulate, 2—3-toothed or lobed at
the tip, more than twice as long as the white sac-like spur.

Frequent in open grassy woods and meadows throughout the Rockies;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Limnorchis dilatatiformis= Rydb. _Purplish-Green
Bog-orchid._]

Stem 1, 2, or 3 feet tall, from a root of 2 or 3 fusiform, hairy
tubers; leafy. Lowest leaves oblanceolate, obtuse, 2—5 inches long,
upper ones lanceolate, acute, much longer. Spike of flowers 4—12 inches
long, loosely flowered, the bracts linear-lanceolate, the lowest much
longer than the flowers, 1—1½ inches long. Flowers about ½ an inch
long; sepals yellowish-green and thin, the upper one ovate, erect,
about ⅛ of an inch long, the lateral ones obtuse and spreading, ¼ of
an inch long, petals lanceolate, acute, greenish-purple or green; lip
purple or greenish, linear, obtuse, thick, over ¼ of an inch long; spur
about ½ as long as the lip, sack-like.

Frequent through the region in open swamps, wet meadows and sloughs,
varying greatly in size; flowering during June and early July.

[Illustration: _a_ Ophrys borealis (Morong). Northern Twayblade.

_b_ Cœloglossum bracteatum (Willo) Parl. Long-Bracted Orchid.

_c_ Limnorchis fragrans Rydb. Fragrant White Bog-Orchid.

_d_ Lysiella obtusata (Pursh) Rydb. Small Northern Bog-Orchid.

_e_ Ophrys nephrophylla Rydb. Heart-Shaped Twayblade.

(⅔ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Limnorchis viridiflora= (Cham.) Rydb. _Small Green
Bog-orchid._]

Stem 8—18 inches high, strict and leafy. Lower leaves oblanceolate,
obtuse, 2—4 inches long, upper lanceolate and acute; spike of flowers
short and dense, the bracts linear-lanceolate, the lower slightly
exceeding the flowers. Flowers ½ an inch long or less, yellowish-green;
upper sepals broadly ovate, erect; lateral ones ¼ of an inch long,
acute, spreading; petals erect, lanceolate, acute; lip lanceolate,
obtuse, less than ¼ of an inch long; spur club-shaped, curved, about
as long as the lip. Differs from the last species in the bright green
colour, slightly smaller flowers with broader based lip and the longer,
club-shaped curved spur.

In bogs throughout the region; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Limnorchis borealis= (Cham.) Rydb. _Small White
Bog-orchid._]

Stem 18 inches to 2 feet high, slender and leafy. Leaves, the lower
oblanceolate and obtuse, the upper lanceolate, acute. Spike of flowers
often rather dense, 4—8 inches long; bracts lanceolate, the lower often
much exceeding the flowers; flowers ½ an inch or more long, white or
sometimes yellowish or greenish-white; upper sepals ovate, obtuse, ¼
of an inch long, lateral ones oblong-lanceolate, spreading; petals
lanceolate, slightly shorter than the sepals; lip rhombic-lanceolate,
obtuse, about ¼ of an inch long; spur club-shaped about the length of
or shorter than the lip.

Throughout the region in open boggy places and wet meadows; flowering
in June.

[Sidenote: =Limnorchis fragrans= Rydb. _Fragrant Orchid._]

Stem slender, 8—12 inches high, from a narrow fusiform tuberous
root. Leaves linear, acute, 2—4 inches long, about ½ an inch wide.
Spike of flowers slender, lax; bracts, lanceolate, acuminate, the
lower slightly longer than the flowers; flowers pure white with a
spicy fragrance; upper sepal ovate-lanceolate, obtuse, the lateral
ones linear-lanceolate, acute, and strongly veined; petals narrowly
linear-lanceolate equalling the sepals; lip lanceolate with an ovate
rhomboid base about ¼ of an inch long; spur slender and curved,
slightly exceeding the lip.

In more or less shaded bogs through the Rockies, flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Ibidium romanzoffianum= (Cham.) House. _Lady’s Tresses._]

Stem smooth, 6—18 inches high, leafy below, bracted above; the lower
leaves 3—8 inches long, linear or linear-oblanceolate. Head of flowers
more or less glandular, hairy, 2—4 inches long, half an inch or more
thick, bracts shorter than the flowers; flowers waxy white or greenish,
nearly half an inch long with an open mouth, spreading horizontally and
very fragrant; upper sepals broad and obtuse; lip oblong, broad at the
base, and contracted below to the crisped apex, thin, transparent, and
veined, callosities merely thickenings of the basal margins of the lip.

Throughout the region in springy places and wet alpine meadows;
flowering toward the end of July.




SALICACEÆ

_Willow Family_


Trees or shrubs with light wood, brittle twigs, and simple alternate
leaves; flowers borne in catkins; the staminate and pistillate on
separate plants, the seed provided with a covering of long, white,
silky, hairs.

[Sidenote: =Populus balsamifera= L. _Balsam Poplar._]

A large tree with nearly smooth gray bark, reaching a maximum height
of 80 feet; branches stout, ascending, the larger buds very resinous.
Leaves smooth, broadly ovate or ovate-lanceolate, entire, dark green
and shining above, pale beneath, acute or acuminate at the apex,
rounded or acute at the base, petioles round. Flowers in slender
catkins, the staminate and pistillate on separate trees.

Throughout the region in the river valleys and on the surrounding
slopes, usually a tree not over 20—30 feet high but sometimes attaining
an immense size.

[Sidenote: =Populus tremuloides= Michx. _American Aspen._]

A slender tree with smooth, light green bark, seldom more than 40—50
feet high, and less than half that in our region. Leaves smooth when
young except on the margins, ovate, short-acuminate at the apex,
rounded at the base, finely crenulate all around; petioles flattened
laterally, very slender, causing the leaves to quiver with the
slightest breeze. Flowers in rather stout catkins.

Frequent in the low valleys and slopes through the Rockies, forming
groves, or singly.

The willows which are very largely represented throughout the region,
in the low or moist ground and banks of streams, as shrubs or small
trees; or on the drier slopes, and in alpine meadows and summits,
frequently as very diminutive shrubs with stems less than an inch
high, have been omitted entirely, owing to the extreme difficulty of
distinguishing between them in a work of this kind.




BETULACEÆ

_Birch Family_


Trees or shrubs with alternate simple leaves; staminate and pistillate
flowers borne in separate catkins on the same plant; the staminate
usually long, slender, and drooping; the pistillate short and erect;
fruit cone-like.

[Sidenote: =Betula papyrifera= Marsh. _Paper Birch, Canoe Birch._]

Becoming a large forest tree; bark chalky white, peeling in
thin layers. Leaves ovate, acute, or acuminate, dentate and
denticulate, smooth above, glandular and hairy on the veins beneath,
slender-petioled 1½—4 inches long. Staminate catkins 2—4 inches long;
pistillate catkins ¾ of an inch or more long.

Sparingly on the slopes in the vicinity of Field, British Columbia; not
a common tree.

[Sidenote: =Betula occidentalis= Hook. _Western Red Birch._]

A tree sometimes 100 feet high but much smaller in our region; the bark
smooth dark bronze; twigs gray-brown, warty. Leaves broadly ovate or
nearly orbicular, sharply serrate, short-petioled, smooth on both sides
or sparingly hairy beneath ¾—2 inches long.

On river shores throughout the region, sparingly from Field west.

[Sidenote: =Betula glandulosa= Michx. _Glandular Birch, Scrub Birch._]

A shrub 1—8 feet with brown, glandular, warty twigs. Leaves orbicular,
oval or ovate, smooth, rounded at the apex, crenate-dentate, bright
green above, pale and sticky, glandular-dotted beneath, short
petioled, ¼—1 inch long. Staminate catkins, commonly solitary, about ½
an inch long; cones when ripe ½—1 inch long.

In moist ground and thickets in the lower valleys through the Rockies,
frequent.

[Sidenote: =Alnus tenuifolia= Nutt. _Slender-leaved Alder._]

A shrub 4—20 feet high with brown bark. Leaves more or less broadly
ovate, 2—3 inches long, acute, rounded or slightly heart-shaped at the
base, acutely doubly toothed, light green and smooth on both sides or
slightly hairy. Staminate catkins slender, drooping, 1—2 inches long;
fruiting cones erect, ½ an inch or less long.

In moist places and thickets and stream banks at the higher elevations
throughout the region, very abundant in the Selkirks.




LORANTHACEÆ

_Mistletoe Family_


Parasitic herbs growing on woody plants and absorbing their food from
the host plant through specialised roots; leaves opposite, frequently
reduced to scales; flowers diœcious or monœcious, regular; in terminal
or axillary clusters.

[Sidenote: =Razoumofskya americana= (Nutt.) Kuntze. _Dwarf Mistletoe._]

Greenish-yellow or brownish, smooth, fleshy; stems rather slender,
numerous, and tufted, forked or branched into 4-angled jointed
branches. Leaves reduced to opposite scales at the joints. Flowers
very small, the staminate and pistillate on separate plants; staminate
plants 2—4 inches long, with the flowers on terminal peduncle-like
joints; pistillate plants much smaller and darker coloured; berries
ovate, purplish-brown, ⅙ of an inch long.

Throughout the Rockies, parasitic on Pinus Murrayana; locally abundant,
appearing in midsummer.




SANTALACEÆ

_Sandalwood Family_


Low herbs parasitic on the roots of other plants, with entire leaves
and perfect, greenish flowers, either terminal or axillary; calyx
3—6-lobed; petals wanting; stamens as many as the calyx lobes and
inserted near their bases or opposite them upon the disc; fruit in
the only genus represented in the region, drupe-like, crowned by the
persistent style.

[Sidenote: =Comandra pallida= DC. _Pale Comandra._]

Stem slender and leafy, 6—12 inches tall, pale and glaucous. Leaves
linear or linear-lanceolate, acute or the lowest of those of the stem,
oblong-elliptic. Flowers small, less than ¼ of an inch high with short
pedicels, clustered at the summit of the stems, calyx purplish or
sometimes nearly white; fruit ovoid-oblong, nearly half an inch high
and crowned by the very short upper portion of the calyx tube.

On dry hillsides throughout the Rockies; flowering during June.

[Illustration: Comandra pallida DC. (⅔ Nat.) White Comandra.]

[Illustration: Eriogonum subalpinum Greene. (½ Nat.) Tall Eriogonum.]

[Sidenote: =Comandra livida= Rich. _Northern Comandra._]

Stem slender, usually quite simple, 4—12 inches high. Leaves
thin, oval, obtuse or rounded at the apex, narrowed at the base,
short-petioled ½—1½ inches long, nearly half as broad, yellowish or
purplish-green when young, becoming bright green or often variegated
with age. Flowers small, less than ¼ of an inch broad; purplish-green,
in axillary clusters of 1—5 flowers; drupe globose-oblong, ¼ of an inch
in diameter, bright red when ripe.

Throughout the Rockies in moist ground and shaded mossy places and
borders of woods, flowering in June. While inconspicuous early in the
season, in midsummer it is apt to be quite showy on account of the
striking, golden yellow veining of the otherwise green leaves; this
condition is due to a fungoid or other disease of the plant.




POLYGONACEÆ

_Buckwheat Family_


Herbs and twining vines with alternate or sometimes opposite or
whorled leaves, jointed stems and usually sheathing united stipules;
flowers small, regular, perfect, monœcious, diœcious or polygamous;
petals none, calyx 2—6-parted, the segments more or less folded over
each other, sometimes petal-like; stamens 2—9 dilated at the base and
distinct or united into a ring; ovary superior, one-celled with a
solitary ovule.

    Flowers not involucrate; stipules sheathing.
       Leaves reniform, sepals 4.                        =Oxyria.=
       Leaves not reniform; sepals 6.
          Sepals unequal; stigmas tufted.                 =Rumex.=
          Sepals equal; stigmas capitate.             =Polygonum.=
    Flowers involucrate, many; stipules wanting.      =Eriogonum.=

[Sidenote: =Oxyria digyna= (L.) Hill. _Mountain Sorrel._]

Stems 2 inches to a foot high, scape-like and leafless, from a large
chaffy rootstock. Leaves basal on long petioles, reniform or orbicular
½—2 inches wide with a wavy margin, sometimes notched at the apex.
Racemes 2—3 inches or more long, of many small flowers on slender
pedicels; crimson or pinkish and showy in fruit.

Frequent at the higher altitudes throughout the region in moist grounds
and beside streams, flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Rumex acetosa= _Sour._]

Stems a foot or more high, smooth. Leaves oblong, hastate or
ovate-sagittate, 1—4 inches long, acute, the basal few and long
petioled, stem leaves sessile, the acute auricles entire. Flowers,
diœcious, minute, crowded in a slender head 3—6 inches long,
yellowish-green tinged with red.

In moist open ground at the higher elevations, more or less frequent
throughout the Rockies, flowering in midsummer.

[Sidenote: =Rumex salicifiolus= Weinm. _Pale-leaved Dock._]

Smooth, pale green, erect, and spreading, 1—3 feet high. Leaves
lanceolate, acute or acuminate at both ends, petioled. Flowers
small greenish-white in erect or reflexed racemes, dense in fruit,
interrupted below; wings of the fruit triangular-ovate, with a large
ovoid tubercle.

Frequent throughout the Rockies at the lower altitudes; flowering in
summer.

[Sidenote: =Polygonum viviparum= L. _Alpine Bistort._]

Smooth, with a corm-like rootstock; stems solitary or clustered, 2—10
inches high. Basal leaves lanceolate or oblong. 1—8 inches long, rather
acute, cordate at the base on long petioles; stem leaves narrowly
lanceolate or linear, upper sessile with revolute margins. Flowers
in a dense terminal raceme several inches long; rose-coloured or
white; stamens exserted; small bulblets frequently developed among the
flowers, which later produce leaves and young plants.

Frequent in moist sandy soil and river banks throughout the Rockies,
flowering in June and July.

Several small weedy species of the genus are also found through the
region but are not sufficiently striking to be here described.

[Sidenote: =Eriogonum subalpinum= Greene. _Tall White Eriogonum._]

Stems depressed, much branched, prostrate and matted at the base.
Leaves oblong to ovate-spatulate, 1—2 inches long, on slender
petioles, smooth and green above, white-woolly beneath. Scape-like
peduncles, erect, 8—14 inches high, with a simple, large umbel of
8—12 rays subtended by a whorl of leaves. Flowers ⅛—¼ of an inch
high, cream-coloured or nearly pure white, and tinged with rosy pink
especially in age.

A striking plant growing in stony places and on rocky slopes,
throughout the Rockies, flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Eriogonum ochroleucum= Small. _Yellowish-white Eriogonum._]

Tufted from a large rootstock. Leaves white and woolly throughout,
densely crowded on the very short stems, elliptic to obovate-spatulate,
half an inch or more long, narrowed at the base into slender,
frequently spirally-twisted petioles; scapes slender, several, six
inches or more high bearing a globular head of pale yellowish-white
flowers ³/₁₆ of an inch high.

On a moist rocky slope at an elevation of 4500 feet near Glacier,
abundant, the plant may occur elsewhere in the region but has not been
observed; flowers in June.




PORTULACACEÆ

_Purslane Family_


Fleshy herbaceous plants, with regular perfect, unsymmetrical flowers;
sepals commonly 2; petals 4 or 5, folded together, stamens equal in
number to the petals or fewer.

[Sidenote: =Claytonia lanceolata= Pursh. _Spring Beauty._]

Stem 3—8 inches high from a round corm. Leaves oblong or lanceolate,
½—1½ inches long. Flowers nearly half an inch broad, few to several in
a loose head, on slender pedicels; petals notched at the end or almost
obcordate, white with pink veins.

One of the first plants to appear in spring on the edges of the snow
banks, throughout the region, from the lower altitudes up to the alpine
summits, flowering throughout the summer according to elevation and
condition of the snow.

[Illustration: Claytonia lanceolata Pursh. (½ Nat.) Spring Beauty.]

[Illustration: Claytonia parvifolia Moc. (½ Nat.) Small-Leaved Spring
Beauty.]

[Sidenote: =Claytonia parvifolia= Moc. _Small-leaved Spring Beauty._]

Stems 6—12 inches high, diffuse, ascending or somewhat reclined or
creeping, sometimes reduced to slender naked runners. Leaves fleshy,
rhombic-ovate, acute, about half an inch long, contracted at the base,
the upper a quarter of an inch long or less. Flowers few and racemose;
petals somewhat obcordate ¼ of an inch long, much surpassing the
rounded sepals, rose-colour varying to white; propagating freely by
bulblet-like offshoots in the axils of the stem leaves, as well as by
the usual method.

In wet stony places and in the gravelly beds of Alpine brooks, frequent
in the Selkirks, flowering in July.




CARYOPHYLLACEÆ

_Pink Family_


Herbaceous plants, often swollen at the nodes, with opposite entire
leaves and perfect or rarely diœcious regular flowers; sepals 4 or 5
persistent, separated or united into a calyx tube; petals equal in
number to the sepals or none; stamens twice as many as the sepals or
fewer.

    Sepals united; petals long clawed.
       Calyx 10-many nerved.
          Styles 3; capsule with 3 or 6 teeth.                 =Silene.=
          Styles 5; capsule with 5 or 10 teeth.               =Lychnis.=
    Sepals free to the base or nearly so.
       Petals two-cleft or rarely none.
          Capsule cylindric, usually curved.                =Cerastium.=
          Capsule ovate or oblong, not curved.                 =Alsine.=
    Petals entire or notched, rarely none.
       Styles as many as the sepals and alternate with them.   =Sagina.=
       Styles fewer than the sepals.
          Seeds appendaged.                                 =Mœhringia.=
          Seeds not appendaged.                              =Arenaria.=

[Illustration: Silene acaulis L. (⅔ Nat.) Moss Campion.]

[Illustration: Lychnis apetala L. (⅔ Nat.) Nodding Lychnis.]

[Sidenote: =Silene acaulis= L. _Moss Campion._]

Closely tufted, an inch or two high, forming cushion-like beds, often 2
feet or more across. Leaves sessile, crowded, linear, ½ an inch or less
long, the margins ciliate. Flowers ¼ of an inch or more across, nearly
sessile or raised on naked curved peduncles, often ½ an inch long;
calyx narrowly campanulate, ¼ of an inch long, smooth, the teeth short,
rounded; petals rose-purple or rarely white, entire or notched.

In alpine meadows, in stony ground, on the moraines and tops of the
mountains throughout the region, flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Silene Lyallii= S. Wats. _Lyall’s Catchfly._]

Stems slender, decumbent at the base, 12—18 inches high, minutely hairy
throughout, glandular above. Leaves, the basal spatulate, obtuse 1—2
inches long on long petioles, those of the stem linear 1—2 inches long,
sessile. Flowers on short peduncles in rather loose terminal heads;
calyx oblong, inflated, about ½ an inch long, narrow, glandular, teeth
purple-tipped; petals white, nearly half an inch long, spreading,
two-lobed.

On grassy alpine slopes throughout the region, flowering in June and
July.

[Sidenote: =Lychnis apetala= L. _Nodding Lychnis._]

More or less glandular-hairy, 2—6 inches high. Leaves linear or
oblanceolate, ½-2½ inches long. Flower solitary, ½—¾ of an inch
long, nodding; calyx inflated, strongly purple veined, its teeth
triangular-ovate, acute; petals purple, as long as or shorter than the
calyx, narrow, 2-cleft.

Among loose boulders on the moraines and alpine summits throughout the
region, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Cerastium arvense strictum= (L.) Rydb. _Field Chickweed._]

Stems tufted, ascending from a decumbent base, 3—6 inches high, hairy
throughout, roughly so at the base; glandular at the summit. Leaves
numerous, ½—¾ of an inch long, narrowly lanceolate, acute, with a broad
sessile base. Flowers several in a more or less close head, nearly half
an inch broad, white; petals deeply notched.

In dry stony ground in the lower valleys of the Rockies, flowering in
June.

[Sidenote: =Cerastium behringianum= Cham. and Schl. _Alpine Chickweed._]

Thick, silky-hairy below, with sticky hairs above; stems matted 1—3
inches high. Leaves small, oblong, ¼ of an inch long or less, rather
thick, obtuse. Flowers ¼ of an inch or more broad; petals white,
notched at the apex, sometimes little longer than the lanceolate sepals.

In stony ground, alpine slopes and summits throughout the Rockies,
flowering during summer.

[Sidenote: =Alsine longipes= (Goldie) Coville. _Long-stalked
Stitchwort._]

Erect or ascending, tufted, simple or rarely sparingly branched, 3—12
inches high, smooth and shining. Leaves light green, lanceolate or
linear-lanceolate, ½—1½ inches long, broad at the base. Flowers few,
¼—⅓ of an inch broad, terminal, on long, slender, erect pedicels;
sepals ovate or lanceolate, acute; petals 2-cleft, exceeding the calyx.

In moist open places throughout the Rockies, flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Alsine læta= (Richards.) Rydb. _Glaucous Stitchwort._]

Low, smooth, or somewhat hairy, 1—4 inches high, very glaucous
throughout, densely leafy at the base. Leaves keeled, lanceolate,
awl-shaped to linear, rather stiff, ¼—½ an inch long. Flowers ¼ of
an inch or more across; sepals lanceolate, acute, ⅛ of an inch long;
petals notched, longer than the sepals; stamens showy, with scarlet
anthers.

In alpine meadows and moist grounds at high altitudes, throughout the
region; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Alsine borealis= (Bigel.) Britton. _Northern Stitchwort._]

Erect or ascending, weak, much branched, smooth, or hairy above, 6—18
inches long. Leaves thin, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, ½—1½ inches
long, acute, sessile, thin, margins slightly hairy or naked. Flowers
small and inconspicuous in a leafy terminal compound head, ascending or
spreading on slender pedicels; sepals ovate-lanceolate, acute; petals
shorter than the sepals or none.

In wet places at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies; flowering
throughout the summer from early June.

[Illustration: _a_ Alsine borealis (Bigel.) Britton. Northern
Stitchwort.

_b_ Mœhringia lateriflora (L.) Fenzl. Blunt-Leaved Sandwort. (½ Nat.)]

[Illustration: Arenaria capillaris nardifolia (Ledeb.) Regel. (⅔ Nat.)
Rock Sandwort.]

[Sidenote: =Sagina saginoides= (L.) Britton. _Arctic Pearl-wort._]

Smooth, stems very slender and tufted, 1—4 inches high. Leaves 1⅛ to
nearly ½ an inch long with a spiny tip. Flowers small, solitary or few
together, at the end of the slender stem, about ⅛ of an inch broad;
petals white minute, hardly exceeding the calyx.

On rocks and moist sandy ground throughout the region; flowering in
June.

[Sidenote: =Mœhringia lateriflora= (L.) Fenzl. _Blunt-leaved Sandwort._]

Stems erect or ascending, simple or at length, sparingly branched,
finely hairy throughout, 4—12 inches high. Leaves thin, oval, or
oblong, ½—1 inch long, obtuse, spreading, the margins and nerves
fringed with hairs. Flowers few in lateral and terminal clusters or
sometimes solitary; ¼ of an inch or more broad, their parts in 4’s or
5’s; sepals oblong, obtuse or acute, half as long as the nearly entire
white petals.

In moist places growing among grass, throughout the Rockies; flowering
in June.

[Sidenote: =Arenaria capillaris nardifolia= (Ledeb.) Regel. _Rock
Sandwort._]

Smooth throughout except the tops of the stems and sepals, which are
glandular; stems slender, 4—8 inches high, numerous from a tufted,
leafy base. Leaves mostly in bundles ½—1½ inches long, smooth, very
slender and curved, with a spiny tip, those of the stem few and much
reduced. Flowers white, ½ an inch broad in a loose branching head.

A rather striking plant on grassy slopes throughout the region;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Arenaria verna equicaulis= A. Nelson. _Vernal Sandwort._]

Very slender, much branched and finely, sticky-hairy throughout;
stems thread-like, numerous, nearly of a uniform length in the same
plant, 2—3 inches long. Leaves crowded at the base, few and much
reduced above, linear, awl-shaped, thick, semi-cylindric, nearly
smooth. Flowers small, little more than ⅛ of an inch across; sepals
ovate-oblong, acute, strongly 3-nerved; petals white, acute, not
exceeding the sepals.

A small tufted plant with wiry stems and minute white star-like
flowers, in moist or dry, sandy places throughout the region from the
low valleys to the alpine summits; flowering in May and June.

[Sidenote: =Arenaria sajanensis= Willd. _Alpine Sandwort._]

Closely tufted, stems densely glandular-hairy, decumbent, very leafy
below, ½—2½ inches long with 2 or 3 pairs of short, rather distant
leaves and terminating in 1—3 flowers. Lower leaves, linear-obtuse,
stiff, ⅛ of an inch or more long, smooth or slightly hairy; calyx lobes
linear-oblong, 1—3 ribbed, glandular, hairy, ⅛ of an inch long; petals
white, broad, equalling or exceeding the sepals.

On high alpine slopes and summits, throughout the Rockies; flowering in
June and July.




RANUNCULACEÆ

_Crowfoot Family_


Herbs or rarely climbing shrubs with acrid sap; leaves usually
alternate without stipules; flowers usually showy, blue, white, yellow,
or scarlet; sepals 3—15, generally soon falling away, often petal-like;
petals about the same number or occasionally wanting; stamens many;
carpels many or rarely solitary.

[Illustration: Atragene columbiana Nutt. (⅔ Nat.) Purple
Virgin’s-Bower.]

    Carpels with solitary ovules; fruit an achene.
       Sepals valvate in the bud; leaves opposite.           =Atragene.=
       Sepals folded on each other in the bud; leaves not opposite.
       Stem leaves three in a whorl.
          Styles short, smooth or hairy.                      =Anemone.=
          Styles long, plumose.                            =Pulsatilla.=
       Stem leaves alternate or basal.
          Petals none, flowers small; leaves compound.     =Thalictrum.=
          Petals present.
             Flowers white.                                =Batrachium.=
             Flowers yellow.
                Achenes papillose or spiny.                =Ranunculus.=
                Achenes longitudinally nerved.            =Halerpestes.=
    Carpels with several ovules; fruit, follicles or berries.
       Flowers regular.
          Leaves simple.
             Petals none; leaves cordate-orbicular.            =Caltha.=
             Petals linear-spatulate; leaves palmately parted.
                                                             =Trollius.=
          Leaves compound.
             Sepals spurred; carpels becoming follicles.    =Aquilegia.=
             Sepals not spurred; carpels becoming berries.      =Actæa.=
       Flowers irregular; upper sepals spurred.            =Delphinium.=

[Sidenote: =Atragene columbiana= Nutt. _Purple Virgin’s-bower._]

A climbing or trailing vine with somewhat woody stems. Leaves
trifoliate, the leaflets thin, on slender petioles, ovate, attenuate,
acute, and entire, 2—3 inches long. Flowers purple, 1½—2 inches
broad, on long peduncles, solitary in the axils of the leaves; sepals
4—6, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, more than twice the length of the
stamens; styles persistent, forming a plumose head of fruit.

In rocky woods and on shaded mountain sides up to 6000 feet elevation,
throughout the Rockies, trailing over the ground, or festooning the
shrubs or lower branches of the trees; flowering in early June.

[Sidenote: =Anemone parviflora= Michx. _Northern Anemone._]

Stem simple, sparingly hairy, 4—8 inches high. Basal leaves
long-petioled, 3-parted, the broadly wedge-shaped divisions
obtusely-lobed or crenate, those of the involucre nearly sessile,
similarly lobed. Flower an inch or less in diameter, sepals, oblong,
very obtuse, white, blue on the outside near the base; stamens
numerous; head of fruit globose.

Common throughout the Rockies in moist ground and rich woods; flowering
early in June.

[Illustration: _a_ Anemone Drummondii S. Wats. Alpine Anemone.

_b_ Anemone parviflora Michx. Northern Anemone. (⅔ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Anemone Drummondii= S. Wats. _Alpine Anemone._]

Sparingly pubescent, with long whitish hairs, especially at the
involucre, 4—6 inches high. Root leaves, slender-petioled, 3-parted,
the divisions cut into linear, oblong obtuse lobes; leaves of the
involucre similar on short petioles, their lobes slightly broader.
Flowers usually solitary, half an inch or more broad on long peduncles;
sepals 5, ovate or oval, obtuse, white, finely appressed-hairy and blue
outside.

Throughout the region in alpine meadows and slopes near the snow,
flowering in June and July as the snows disappear.

[Sidenote: =Anemone globosa= Nutt. _Wind-flower._]

Stems 3—15 inches high, close, silky-hairy. Root leaves long-petioled,
nearly semicircular in outline, 3-parted, the sessile divisions deeply
lobed, with cleft, linear segments, involucral leaves similar, short
petioled. Sepals 5—8, red, bluish or nearly pure white, half an inch
or less long, soft, hairy outside, receptacle oblong, in fruit densely
woolly.

The most abundant anemone through the Rockies in the low open valleys,
and, occasionally on the slopes, presenting the greatest variety of
colouring from deep rosy pink to pure white and occasionally blue;
flowering in early June.

[Sidenote: =Pulsatilla hirsutissima= (Pursh.) Britton. _Pasque-Flower._]

Villous, 6—18 inches high. Leaves much divided into narrow, linear,
acute lobes, the basal on slender petioles, those of the involucre
sessile and erect or ascending. Flowers bluish-purple, sometimes nearly
white inside; sepals 5—7 ovate-oblong 1—1½ inches long, forming a cup;
fruit a head of long silky achenes 2 inches or more in diameter.

This is one of the earliest and most beautiful of all the spring
flowers, in the open meadows and mountain sides, blossoming through May
and June according to the situation. Probably its most common local
name, in the Rockies where it is very abundant, is that of crocus, to
which flower it does bear a superficial resemblance, in size, shape,
and colour, and in the habit of the flower appearing as soon as the
snow has left the ground, and before the leaves.

[Illustration: _a_ Pulsatilla hirsutissima (Pursh Britton). Pasque
Flower.

_b_ Pulsatilla occidentalis (S. Wats.) Freyn. (⅔ Nat.) Western
Anemone.]

[Sidenote: =Pulsatilla occidentalis= (S. Wats.) Freyn. _Western
Anemone._]

Stem rather stout, silky-hairy, 6—18 inches high, simple. Leaves
biternate, the lower on long petioles, the divisions deeply pinnatifid
into deeply cut linear, acute lobes; those of the involucre similar but
short-petioled. Flowers 1½—2 inches broad, peduncled, the peduncles
much elongated in fruit; sepals spreading, 6—7, oval-obtuse, white, the
outside usually blue at the base; fruit of long plumose tailed achenes
in a globular fluffy head.

Frequent throughout the Rockies at an elevation of 6000 to 10,000 feet,
blossoming on the edges of the snow banks as they recede, a conspicuous
feature of many an alpine meadow during early June.

[Sidenote: =Thalictrum megacarpum= Torr. _Veiny Meadow Rue._]

Smooth, pale green, and glaucous; stem purplish, erect, 6—18 inches
tall. Leaves 3—4, ternate, long-petioled, leaflets firm, obovate,
rounded at the apex, wedge-shaped or subcordate at the base, ¼—½ an
inch long, 3—5-lobed, the lower surface prominently veined. Flowers
diœcious, with 4 or 5 small, purplish-green sepals and large, linear,
wedge-shaped anthers or slender styles; the achenes wedge-shaped and
tapering into a short beak.

A frequent plant in the dry open valleys in the Rockies at the lower
altitudes; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Thalictrum occidentale= A. Gray. _Western Meadow Rue._]

Stems slender, 1—3 feet high. Leaves 2—4, ternate, the lowest petioled;
leaflets thin, ¼ to nearly an inch long, 3—9 lobed at the summit,
sparingly glandular-hairy beneath. Flowers diœcious, nodding on very
slender pedicels in an ample open panicle; calyx of 4—8 sepals which
soon fall, filaments purplish and slender; anthers linear and pointed;
achenes lanceolate or somewhat sickle-shaped, nearly half an inch long.

Frequent in rich woods and moist shady places at the lower altitudes
throughout the Rockies; flowering in June, like the previous species
striking for its leaves, resembling a robust maiden-hair fern, and the
large loose heads of delicate tasselled flowers.

[Illustration: Thalictrum megacarpum Torr. (⅓ Nat.)]

[Illustration: Thalictrum occidentale A. Gray. (⅓ Nat.) Western Meadow
Rue.]

[Sidenote: =Batrachium trichophyllum= (Chaix.) Bossch. _White Water
Crowfoot._]

Aquatic herb with submerged stems, a foot long or more. Leaves
petioled, 1—2 inches long, finely dissected. Flowers white with yellow
centre, ½—¾ of an inch broad, blooming on the surface of the water on
stout pedicels 1—2 inches or more long.

Frequent throughout the Rockies at the lower altitudes in shallow ponds
and ditches; flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus Purshii= Richards. _Pursh’s Buttercup._]

Aquatic or creeping, hairy, at least on the younger parts. Leaves
slender-petioled, ¼—1 inch, wide, palmately divided nearly to the base,
into obtuse lobes. Flowers less than ½ an inch broad, bright yellow;
petals 5; head of fruit globose, a little less than ¼ of an inch broad.

Frequent in shallow pools throughout the Rockies; flowering throughout
the summer.

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus reptans= L. _Creeping Spearwort._]

Stems creeping, rooting at the joints; flowering stems and peduncles
ascending. Leaves linear-lanceolate or spatulate ½—2 inches long,
entire, gradually narrowed into the petiole. Flowers nearly half an
inch broad, solitary, on peduncles ¾—2 inches long; petals 4—7, much
exceeding the calyx; stamens numerous; achenes flat.

On muddy shores of ponds and streams throughout the Rockies, flowering
in midsummer, the creeping stems frequently interlaced and forming
dense mats.

[Illustration: _a_ Ranunculus eremogenes Greene. Ditch Crowfoot.

_b_ Ranunculus Purshii Richards. (⅓ Nat.) Pursh’s Buttercup.]

[Illustration: Ranunculus inamœnus Greene. (⅓ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus pedatifidus= J. E. Smith. _Northern Buttercup._]

Erect 4—12 inches high, branching. Basal leaves petioled, broadly ovate
or nearly orbicular, about ¾ of an inch broad, crenate or often lobed,
those of the stem deeply and narrowly lobed, nearly sessile. Flowers
about ⅓ of an inch in diameter, petals little surpassing the spreading
sepals.

In moist shaded situations near Banff; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus eremogenes= Greene. _Ditch Crowfoot._]

Stem branching, more or less hairy, 6—18 inches high, sparingly leafy.
Leaves rounded in outline, mostly 5-parted, the segments cut into about
3-toothed lobes. Flowers of ¼ an inch or more broad, the light yellow
petals surpassing the sepals; fruit in an obtusely ovoid head.

In wet springy places, ditches and the margins of pools, frequent
through the Rockies at the lower altitudes; flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus Eschscholtzii= Schl. _Snow Buttercup._]

Smooth, 3—12 inches high, 1—3-flowered. Leaves round in outline,
those at the root all 3—5-parted and deeply cut; their obovate or
wedge-shaped divisions mostly lobed or narrowly cut, stem-leaves
similar with oblong to spatulate or lanceolate, often entire divisions.
Flowers bright yellow; petals 5, a third of an inch or more long.

Frequent at the higher altitudes, blooming close to the melting snow,
throughout the region; flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus alpeophilus= A. Nelson.]

Similar in habit to the previous species though usually larger, bright
green and nearly smooth throughout. Leaves sparingly hairy on the
margins, the basal broader and less divided. Flowers pale yellow, ¼ of
an inch or more broad; petals little longer than the calyx.

Along streams and in moist grounds, an alpine species frequent
throughout the Rockies; flowering in June and July.

[Illustration: _a_ Ranunculus saxicola Rydb.

_b_ Ranunculus alpeophilus A. Nelson. (½ Nat.)]

[Illustration: Ranunculus Eschscholtzii Schl. (⅔ Nat.) Snow Buttercup.]

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus saxicola.= Rydb.]

Stems about 4 inches long, decumbent or ascending, smooth. Basal leaves
on petioles 2 inches long, rounded, somewhat hairy when young, 3-lobed,
lobes spreading and toothed, stem-leaves 1—3, nearly sessile, cleft
into 3—7 linear lobes. Flowers about ½ an inch broad, sepals tinged
with brown, half the length of the petals, broad, obovate, obtuse,
slightly hairy; petals broadly obovate, bright yellow; achenes more or
less hairy, with a straight style.

Throughout the Rockies in stony ground at the higher altitudes;
flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus inamœnus.= Greene.]

Stems rather stout, 6—12 inches high, slightly hairy. Root leaves
on short petioles, rounded, crenate-toothed or 3-lobed, stem leaves
sessile and cut into 3—6 oblong-lanceolate segments. Flowers ¼ of
an inch or more broad, usually several together on short slender
peduncles; petals obovate-oblong, light yellow; achenes small, hairy.

In open ground sparingly throughout the Rockies at the lower
elevations; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus Suksdorfii= A. Gray.]

Stem 3—6 inches high, smooth, slender, 1—3-flowered. Leaves ½ an inch
or more long, sub-reniform or broadly fan-shaped with wedge-shaped
base, deeply 3—5-cleft or parted, the radical into cuneate 3—5-cleft
or incised divisions, those of the stem linear. Flowers bright yellow;
petals round-obovate, ⅓—½ an inch long.

In moist ground on slopes, throughout the Rockies; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus eximius= Greene. _Low Buttercup._]

Stems hairy, 6—10 inches high, branching. Leaves few, basal, rounded
in outline, ternately lobed, sometimes deeply so, on slender petioles;
stem leaves sessile or nearly so, cut into narrowly linear or
linear-lanceolate lobes. Flowers ¾ of an inch or more broad, petals
spreading, bright yellow and shining on the upper surface; sepals not
reflexed.

A showy low buttercup in the dry open valleys in the Rockies; flowering
in June.

[Illustration: Aquilegia brevistyla Hook. (¾ Nat.) Small Blue
Columbine.]

[Sidenote: =Ranunculus montanensis= Rydb. _Meadow Buttercup._]

Stem stout, 1—2 feet high, branching with long rough hairs. Basal
leaves long, hairy all over, 3-parted, the divisions again divided or
cut into linear or lanceolate segments; petioles 3 or 4 inches long;
stem-leaves similar but short petioled. Flowers few, large; sepals
broadly ovate with silky hairs; petals broadly ovate, nearly half
an inch long, bright yellow; head of achenes, globose; style long,
slender, and much curved.

Frequent in the Rockies at the lower altitudes in more or less shaded
grassy situations; flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Halerpestes Cymbalaria= (Pursh.) Green. _Creeping
Crowfoot._]

Stems creeping and rooting at the joints, 1—7-flowered. Leaves broadly
ovate, coarsely crenate, clustered at the base and joints of the long
slender runners. Flowers ¼ of an inch across; petals light yellow,
longer than the sepals; fruit in oblong heads.

A common species throughout the Rockies in damp ground, frequently
forming mats several feet across; flowering continuously throughout the
summer.

[Sidenote: =Caltha leptosepala= Hook. _White Marsh Marigold._]

Stems erect, 2—12 inches high, 1—2-flowered. Leaves roundish or
oblong-cordate, longer than broad, irregularly crenate-toothed; sepals
6—8, lanceolate, ¾ of an inch long, white, strongly suffused with blue
on the outside; stamens numerous; pistils 5—15.

In springy ground and wet alpine meadows throughout the region, often
growing in such abundance as to make the meadows brilliant with the
blue and white flowers, which appear soon after the snow has left the
ground in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Trollius albiflorus= (A. Gray.) Rydb. _Western
Globe-flower._]

Stem erect, 6—12 inches high, more or less branching. Leaves palmately
divided, the segments many cleft. Flowers solitary, 1—1½ inches broad,
subtended by a whorl of leaves; sepals broadly obovate 5—6, pure white
tinged on the back with greenish rose; petals 15—20, less than ¼ of an
inch long, narrowly truncate, bright yellow, nearly concealed by the
numerous stamens.

One of the most abundant and conspicuous of the spring flowers of
the alpine meadows, and marshy borders of alpine streams and lakes,
commencing to flower when but a few inches high on the edges of the
melting snow in May and June.

[Illustration: _a_ Caltha leptosepala Hook.

_b_ Trollius albiflorus (A. Gray) Rydb. Western Globe-Flower. (⅔
Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Aquilegia brevistyla= Hook. _Small Blue Columbine._]

One to two feet high, slender, sparingly branched. Leaves, the basal
long-petioled, biternate, lobed and crenate, the stem leaves few,
nearly sessile and lobed. Flowers ½ an inch or more long, nodding,
sepals blue, petals creamy-white with a short blue spur not more than ¼
of an inch long; styles and stamens hardly exceeding the petals.

In open rocky situations, rather local, common in the region around
Banff, flowering in May and June.

[Sidenote: =Aquilegia flavescens= S. Wats. _Yellow Columbine._]

Stems smooth, 1—3 feet high, branched. Leaves ternate, leaflets
round-cordate, 3-parted, the segments coarsely toothed, 2—3-cleft.
Flowers yellow, an inch or more long, nodding; sepals reflexed,
oblong-ovate, acute, longer than the spurs; petals spreading with a
spur half an inch long; styles and stamens nearly equal, much exserted.

The commonest columbine throughout the region, growing in woods and on
slopes up to 8000 feet, varying greatly in colour; flowering in June
and July according to the elevation.

[Sidenote: =Aquilegia formosa= Fisch. _Western Columbine._]

Stem 2—4 feet high, branching, sparingly pubescent with spreading
hairs. Leaves, the lower triternately parted on long petioles, the
upper sessile and ternate or reduced to simple bracts, leaflets broadly
wedge-shaped, 3-cleft. Flowers scarlet, drooping, more than an inch
long; sepals scarlet varying to orange, spreading or reflexed, an inch
long, lanceolate, acute; petals yellow, more or less spreading, with
a scarlet spur about the length of the sepals; styles and stamens
exserted.

Throughout the Selkirks, in moist ground, on slopes and borders of
rocky alpine streams, flowering during July and late June.

[Illustration: _a_ Aquilegia flavescens S. Wats. Yellow Columbine.

_b_ Aquilegia formosa Fisch. Western Columbine. (⅔ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Delphinium Brownii= Rydb. _Western Larkspur._]

Stem tall, 2—5 feet high, leafy. Leaves mostly orbicular in outline,
5—7-parted, the upper into narrow-cleft, laciniate divisions, petioled.
Flowers nodding, less than an inch long, dull purple, bluish or
occasionally white, numerous in an elongated spike; sepals 5, blue, ⅓
of an inch long, not spreading, the upper one prolonged into a spur,
half an inch long; petals white, nearly as long as the sepals.

Frequent in the region around Banff in open woods at the lower
altitudes, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Delphinium Menziesii= DC. _Blue Larkspur._]

Sparingly leafy, 10—18 inches tall, from a tuberous rootstock. Leaves,
the lowest round reniform, cut into irregular, oblong, obtuse lobes,
the upper with linear, acute lobes. Flowers few in a simple panicle,
sepals lanceolate, obtuse, ¾ of an inch or more long, spreading,
brilliant blue, about as long as the short curved spur; petals
exserted, white with purple veins.

Throughout the region in open ground and on grassy slopes; flowering in
early June or later according to the altitude.

[Sidenote: =Actæa arguta= Nutt. _Western Red Baneberry._]

Stems erect, 2—3 feet high, smooth except the inflorescence. Leaves
large, ternately compound, the basal leaf long-petioled, the divisions
long petioled and pinnate, leaflets ovate, 1½—5 inches long, cut with
sharp teeth. Raceme ovoid, 1—2 inches long; flowers small, white, with
petal-like sepals; petals, 4—10 spatulate and minute; stamens numerous;
berries in a spreading raceme, small, spherical, and purplish red.

Frequent in the rich woods throughout the region, at the lower
altitudes; flowering in late May and early June.

[Illustration: Delphinium Brownii Rydb. (½ Nat.) Mountain Larkspur.]

[Illustration: Anemone globosa Nutt. (⅓ Nat.) Wind-Flower.]

[Sidenote: =Actæa eburnea= Rydb. _Western White Baneberry._]

Similar to the preceding species and often growing with it and
difficult to distinguish from it when in flower: in fruit, however,
they are quite distinct. In A. eburnea the berries are fully twice as
large, nearly half an inch long and a quarter of an inch in diameter
and pure waxy white.

In rich moist woods throughout the Rockies; flowering with the other
species in May and early June; fruiting in late July.




BERBERIDACEÆ

_Barberry Family_


Shrubs or herbs with alternate or basal leaves, with or without
stipules, and solitary or racemed, mostly terminal flowers; sepals and
petals generally overlapping in several series; stamens as many as the
petals and opposite them; flowers perfect.

[Sidenote: =Berberis aquifolium= Pursh. _Trailing Mahonia._]

A smooth, trailing shrub. Leaves petioled, pinnate, leaflets 3—7,
ovate or oval, oblique, obtuse, truncate or slightly cordate at the
base, sessile thick, persistent, finely veiny, 1—2 inches long, with
spine-bearing teeth. Flowers yellow, in several erect, dense, terminal
racemes; berry globose, blue or purple.

A straggling shrub with spiny glossy dark green leaves, which change to
beautiful tints of scarlets and yellows during midsummer and autumn.
Frequent in the Rockies in woods; flowering in June.




PAPAVERACEÆ

_Poppy Family_


Herbs with milky or coloured sap and alternate leaves or the upper
rarely opposite, flowers perfect, regular or irregular; sepals 2,
rarely 3 or 4, soon falling off; petals 4—6 or rarely more, folded
together, often wrinkled; stamens numerous.

[Illustration: _a_ Delphinium Menziesii DC. Blue Larkspur.

_b_ Lithophragma parviflora (Hook.) Nutt. Lithophragma.

(¾ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Capnodes aureum= (Willd.) Kuntze. _Golden Corydalis._]

Smooth, 4—12 inches long, diffusely branching. Leaves all but the
uppermost petioled, finely cut into oblong-obovate or wedge-shaped
segments. Flowers numerous in an oblong head, bright golden yellow,
nearly half an inch long; spur ½ the length of the body of the corolla,
outer petals keeled, not crested; pods spreading or pendulose,
torulose; seeds obtuse, margined, shining, obscurely ridged.

Frequent throughout the Rockies in open ground at the lower altitudes
where it has been recently burned or cleared; flowering during most of
the summer.




BRASSICACEÆ

_Mustard Family_


Herbs, rarely somewhat woody, with watery acrid juice, alternate
leaves and racemose or corymbose white, yellow, or pink flowers;
sepals and petals 4; stamens 6, rarely fewer; pistil 1, consisting of 2
united carpels.

    Pods short; silicles.
       Pod compressed parallel to the partition.                =Draba.=
       Pod compressed contrary to the partition, ovate;
          flowers white.                                      =Thlaspi.=
    Pod inflated, obcordate; flowers yellow.                 =Physaria.=
    Pods elongated; siliques.
       Pod compressed parallel to the partition.
          Valves nerveless; flowers white.                  =Cardamine.=
          Valves 1-nerved; flowers white or pink.              =Arabis.=
       Pods terete, not at all compressed.
          Pods 1½ inches long or more.
             Flowers yellow, stigma 2-lobed.                 =Erysimum.=
          Pods less than 1½ inches long.
             Leaves grey with fine hairs; flowers white.   =Smelowskia.=
             Leaves not grey-hairy; flowers yellow or white.
                Pubescence of simple hairs.                =Sisymbrium.=
                Pubescence of forked hairs.
                   Leaves pinnate or pinnatifid; flowers yellow.
                                                               =Sophia.=
                   Leaves entire or nearly so; flowers white.
                                                                =Braya.=
                Smooth throughout.
                   Leaves pinnate or pinnatifid; flowers white.
                                                               =Roripa.=

[Illustration: Draba oligosperma Hook. (Nat.) Whitlow-Grass.]

[Illustration: Draba andina (Nutt.) A. Nelson. (⅔ Nat.) Mountain
Whitlow-Grass.]

[Sidenote: =Draba glacialis= Adams.]

Caudex much branched, branches short and slender. Leaves strongly
keeled, ¼—¾ of an inch long, more or less loosely stellate-pubescent,
sometimes ciliate at the base. Scapes slender, ¼—6 inches high, hairy
or nearly smooth; racemes few-flowered; sepals with a few long hairs
or smooth petals ⅛ of an inch long, pale yellow, darker at the base;
pod ¼ of an inch or more long, narrowly oblong, acute at both ends, on
pedicels ¼ of an inch or more long; style distinct.

In dry, exposed stony places throughout the Rockies, flowering in early
spring.

[Sidenote: =Draba oligosperma= Hook.]

Stems much branched from the root, densely tufted at the base. Leaves
erect, linear, obtuse, tapering to the base, stiff, ciliate, with
stellate hairs on both sides, especially toward the apex. Scapes
naked; flowers racemose; calyx smooth or with scattered hairs, petals
white or pale yellow, obovate, ⅛ of an inch or more long, pods short,
nearly orbicular, acute at the apex, more or less rounded at the base,
sparingly short-hairy, ⅛ of an inch long; style ⅓ its length. Alpine
summits and dry ridges throughout the Rockies; flowering in May and
June.

[Sidenote: =Draba andina= (Nutt.) A. Nelson.]

Densely cæspitose. Leaves linear-oblong, obtuse, ⅛ of an inch long
or less, stiff and rigid, densely imbricated, forming numerous small
rosettes: stellate-pubescent on both sides. Scapes slender, 1—2 inches
high, few-flowered, petals pale yellow or white, ⅛ of an inch long;
twice as long as the hairy calyx; pods ⅛ of an inch or less long with
short stiff hairs.

On exposed rocks and alpine summits throughout the Rockies, frequent in
the vicinity of Banff, flowering in May and June.

[Sidenote: =Draba nivalis= Liljb. _Arctic Whitlow-grass._]

Caudex with numerous slender matted branches. Leaves in dense
tufts, oblanceolate, acutish with a rather stout mid-nerve, entire,
white-hairy, with dense stellate pubescence, not at all ciliate or
slightly so near the base, ¼ of an inch long or less. Scapes slender,
hairy, 1—3 inches high, calyx hairy; flowers ⅛ of an inch high, the
white petals slightly exceeding the calyx; pods few, usually smooth,
oblong, acute at each end, ½ of an inch or less long on short pedicels
and with a short stout style and 2-lobed stigma.

On alpine summits and exposed ledges throughout the Rockies; flowering
in June.

[Illustration: Draba glacialis Adams. (⅔ Nat.) Whitlow-Grass.]

[Illustration: Draba aurea Vahl. (½ Nat.) Golden Whitlow-Grass.]

[Sidenote: =Draba lonchocarpa= Rydb.]

Similar to the preceding species but with the leaves obtuse; pods ⅓—⅔
of an inch long, smooth, very narrow and usually more or less twisted,
on slender pedicels ¼—½ an inch long.

In moist or shaded ground, on alpine summits or on ledges, throughout
the Rockies; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Draba aurea= Vahl. _Golden Whitlow-grass._]

Pubescent throughout with short stellate hairs; stems rather stout,
erect, frequently several from the same root; leafy, 2—15 inches high.
Leaves entire or few-toothed, oblanceolate or lanceolate, stem leaves
usually narrowed and frequently ciliate at the base, ½—2 inches long.
Flowers bright yellow in an elongated leafy raceme; calyx smooth or
somewhat hairy; petals elliptic, less than ⅛ of an inch long; pods
lanceolate to linear, acute, hairy, often twisted, ¼—½ an inch long on
peduncles half their length.

Frequent in dry open ground at the lower altitudes throughout the
Rockies; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Draba incana= L. _Hoary Whitlow-grass._]

Erect, simple, or somewhat branched, leafy, stellate-pubescent
throughout, 6—12 inches high. Leaves lanceolate, oblanceolate or ovate,
¼—1 inch long, acute or obtuse, dentate or nearly entire; flowers
white, ⅛ of an inch or less broad; petals notched, twice as long as
the sepals; pod oblong or lanceolate, acute ⅓—½ an inch long on nearly
erect pedicels about ½ their length.

Throughout the region in moist ravines; flowering during June.

Other species of Draba occur in the region but being neither common nor
striking it is deemed out of place to describe them here.

[Illustration: Physaria didymocarpa (Hook.) A. Gray. (⅔ Nat.)
Bladder-Pod.]

[Illustration: Smelowskia calycina (Desv.) C. A. Meyer. (⅔ Nat.)
Smelowskia.]

[Sidenote: =Thlaspi arvense= L. _Penny-cress._]

Decumbent or erect, 6—12 inches high, simple or much branched above.
Leaves spatulate or oblong, obtuse, obtusely- or runcinately-toothed or
angled. Flowers small, white, in a compact head; pods large, ½ an inch
broad, orbicular or nearly so, strongly winged and compressed.

In moist low ground and waste places throughout the Rockies, flowering
in June.

[Sidenote: =Physaria didymocarpa= (Hook.) A. Gray. _Double
Bladder-pod._]

Densely stellate, canescent, pale green, root long and deep. Stems
decumbent or ascending, slender, simple, 3—12 inches long. Leaves
spatulate, the basal ones obtuse, entire or few lobed, narrowed into
margined petioles: stem leaves nearly sessile, acute, much smaller.
Flowers about ½ an inch broad, light yellow in a close raceme, 2—5
inches long in fruit; pods much inflated and variable, often ½ an inch
thick.

In dry clayey and stony soil and on slopes throughout the Rockies;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Cardamine pennsylvanica= Muhl. _Pennsylvania Bitter-cress._]

Smooth or rarely with a few scattered hairs; stems erect, stout or
slender, 8 inches to 3 feet high, usually much branched, somewhat
succulent, leafy up to the racemes. Basal leaves 2—6 inches long, the
terminal leaflet obovate, ovate or obcordate, usually narrowed at
the base, ¼—¾ of an inch wide, the lateral 4—8 pairs oblong, oval or
obovate, all toothed or some of them entire. Flowers about ⅛ of an inch
broad, white; pods very narrowly linear, ½—1¼ inches long, erect when
mature on ascending pedicels.

In wet shaded places, sparingly throughout the region; flowering during
June and July.

[Sidenote: =Arabis hirsuta= (L.) Scop. _Hairy Rock-cress._]

Stem erect, nearly simple, 1—2 feet high, roughly hairy or nearly
smooth. Basal leaves on margined petioles forming a rosette, obovate or
spatulate, obtuse, denticulate, 1—2 inches long; stem leaves sessile,
clasping by an auriculate base, lanceolate or oblong. Flowers ¼ of an
inch or less long, white, in a strict, elongated raceme; pods narrowly
linear, erect or appressed, 1—2 inches long.

In open grounds throughout the Rockies at the lower altitudes;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Arabis Holboldii= Hornem. _Stony Rock-cress._]

Finely stellately pubescent throughout; stems frequently
several, simple or branched, erect ½—2½ feet high. Root leaves
narrowly oblanceolate, entire, an inch or less long; stem leaves
linear-lanceolate to narrowly oblong, acute, sagittate. Flowers rosy
pink or rarely white, becoming more or less reflexed, ¼ of an inch
long; pods more or less abruptly reflexed, straight or somewhat curved
1½—2½ inches long, very narrowly linear.

On banks and stony slopes throughout the Rockies; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Arabis Drummondii= A. Gray. _Drummond’s Rock-cress._]

Slightly glaucous, stems erect; 1—2 feet high. Root leaves narrowly
oblanceolate more or less hairy; the stem leaves oblong or
linear-lanceolate, 1—2 inches long. Flowers white or pinkish, ¼ of
an inch long in a close panicle, elongated in fruit; pods erect when
mature, slender, 1½—3 inches long, obtuse.

In open ground and on slopes throughout the Rockies, flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Arabis Lyallii= S. Wats. _Lyall’s Rock-cress._]

Low, smooth, throughout, or sometimes more or less stellate-pubescent
below; stem simple, several, or many from the same root. Lower leaves
spatulate or linear-oblanceolate, usually ½—1 inch long, sometimes
longer; stem leaves narrowly lanceolate or oblong, sometimes scarcely
auricled. Flowers rose-colour, ¼ of an inch long; pods erect or
ascending, very slender, straight or nearly so, 1—2 inches long.

Alpine meadows and slopes at the higher elevations throughout the
Rockies, flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Erysimum inconspicuum= (S. Wats.) MacM. _Treacle Mustard._]

Erect, 10—18 inches high, cinereous and rough with 2-parted hairs.
Leaves narrowly linear-lanceolate or oblong-linear, mostly entire,
the root leaves crowded and sometimes repand dentate. Flowers sulphur
yellow in a compact head, elongated in fruit, calyx campanulate, ¼ inch
high, petals ⅓ longer, the blades spreading; pods slender, erect or
nearly so at maturity, 1—2 inches long.

In gravelly places, common on the eastern slopes of the Rockies at the
lower elevations, flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Smelowskia calycina= (Desv.) C. A. Meyer. _Smelowskia._]

Very variable in foliage, finely stellate-pubescent and usually
cinereous-villous with larger single hairs; caudex stout, branched.
Leaves soft in texture, usually deeply pinnatifid with 2-several pairs
of linear to obovate, obtuse segments. Stems several, 1—6 inches high,
racemes at first dense and corymbose, becoming elongated in fruit.
Flowers white with exserted broad rounded petals ⅛ of an inch or more
long; pods usually lanceolate, tapering to each end.

On alpine summits through the Rockies; not common; flowering in June
and July.

[Sidenote: =Sisymbrium altissimum= L. Tall _Hedge Mustard._]

Erect, 2—4 feet high, freely branching, smooth or nearly so. Lower
leaves runcinate-pinnatifid, petioled, the lobes lanceolate, often
auriculate; upper leaves smaller, short petioled, or usually sessile,
very deeply pinnatifid, the lobes linear or lanceolate, dentate or
entire, the uppermost often reduced to linear, entire bracts. Flowers
pale yellow, ¼ of an inch broad on slender spreading pedicels, pods
very narrowly linear, divergent, 2—4 inches long.

At the lower elevations throughout the region as a weed, especially on
the line of the railway, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Sophia intermedia= Rydb. _Western Tansy-Mustard._]

Stems 1—2 feet high, sparingly greyish-puberulent, especially below,
or sometimes nearly smooth, often glandular above; hairs more or less
stellate. Leaves twice or thrice-pinnatifid, the primary divisions
oblanceolate or obovate, divided to near the midrib into linear or
linear-oblong segments, sparingly puberulent. Raceme rather long,
flowers small, less than ⅛ of an inch high; petals yellow; peduncles
diverging sometimes nearly at right angles; pod club-shaped.

Common throughout the Rockies in open places at the lower altitudes,
flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Braya humilis= (Meyer) Robinson. _Northern Rock-cress._]

Erect 4—10 inches high, branching below, sparingly hairy. Leaves
spatulate or oblanceolate, the lower obtuse, 1—2 inches long, narrowed
into a petiole, sharply dentate or rarely entire, the upper smaller,
narrower, often acute. Flowers white or pink ⅛ of an inch or more
broad, pedicels erect, ¼ of an inch long in fruit; pods nearly terete,
narrowly linear, ½—¾ of an inch long, valves finely nerved.

In moist gravelly or stony ground throughout the Rockies at the lower
altitudes, flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Roripa Nasturtium= (L.) Rusby. _Water-cress._]

Aquatic, smooth, branched, floating or creeping, rooting from the
joints. Leaves odd-pinnate of 3—9 segments, the terminal one larger
than the lateral, all obtuse, ovate or oval or the terminal one nearly
orbicular. Racemes elongated in fruit; flowers white, ⅛ of an inch
or more broad; pod ½—1¼ inches long, spreading and slightly curved
upwards, on pedicels of about their length.

In ditches and shallow pools through the Rockies, especially abundant
at Banff in the warm water at the outlet from the Basin; flowering
through June and July.




CRASSULACEÆ

_Stone-Crop Family_


Fleshy smooth herbs with alternate leaves, and perfect flowers in
terminal, oftentimes 1-sided cymes. Calyx 4—5-lobed; petals 4—5,
distinct, stamens twice as many as the petals; carpels 4—5, styles
short.

[Sidenote: =Sedum stenopetalum= Pursh. _Narrow Petaled Stone-crop._]

Perennial, tufted, smooth, flowering branches 3—7 inches long. Leaves
alternate, crowded, sessile, linear ¼—½ an inch long, entire. Flowers
bright yellow, nearly half an inch broad in a 5—7-forked, compact cyme,
petals narrowly lanceolate, very acute.

Common throughout the Rockies in moist, gravelly or sandy soil, on
river shores, and on rocky slopes, flowering in June and July.




PARNASSIACEÆ

_Grass-of-Parnassus Family_


Smooth bog-herbs with a rosette of basal leaves and generally one or
a few alternate stem leaves and solitary, terminal flowers. Flowers
perfect; calyx generally 5-lobed to near the base; petals 5; perfect
stamens 5; staminodia (imperfect stamens) in clusters at the base of
each petal; stigmas 4.

[Sidenote: =Parnassia fimbriata= Banks. _Fringed Grass-of-Parnassus._]

Leaves tufted at the base on petioles 2—6 inches long; blades reniform
or broadly cordate, ¾—½ an inch wide, thin, smooth, with about 7
principal veins. Flowers ¾ of an inch or more broad on a scape 8—12
inches high with a small cordate clasping bract about the middle;
sepals ¼ of an inch long, elliptic, obtuse; petals obovate, pure white,
fringed at the base, staminodia united into 5 fleshy obovate scales.

Common throughout the region in springy places and damp mossy banks at
the lower altitudes, flowering during July.

[Illustration: Parnassia montanensis Rydb. & Fernald. (½ Nat.) Marsh
Grass of Parnassus.]

[Illustration: Ribes lacustre (Pers.) Poir. (¼ Nat.) Swamp
Gooseberry.]

[Sidenote: =Parnassia montanensis= Rydb. and Fernald. _Marsh
Grass-of-Parnassus._]

Leaves tufted at the base on short petioles, blades ovate with a
cordate or rounded base ¾ of an inch long. Flowers solitary, on scapes
8 inches or more high with a large ovate bract below the middle; sepals
lanceolate, acute, ¼ of an inch or more long, petals oval to elliptic
only slightly larger than the sepals; staminodial scales with 7—9
gland-tipped filaments.

Throughout the Rockies in marshy ground and shaded river shores;
flowering in June and early July.

[Sidenote: =Parnassia parviflora= DC. _Small-flowered
Grass-of-Parnassus._]

Scapes slender, 4—12 inches high, usually bearing a clasping oval
leaf at the middle. Basal leaves on slender petioles, oval or ovate,
narrowed at the base, not cordate, ½—1 inch long. Flowers about ⅓ of
an inch broad, sepals equalling or somewhat shorter than the elliptic
sessile petals; staminodia 5—7 at the base of each petal.

In wet gravelly places at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies;
flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Parnassia Kotzebuei= Cham. and Schl. _Alpine
Grass-of-Parnassus._]

Much smaller than the preceding species. Basal leaves few on petioles
less than an inch long; blades broadly ovate, ½ an inch long. Flowers
on slender scapes 2—4 inches high, without any bract; sepals oblong,
about ¼ of an inch long, equalling or exceeding the elliptic or oval
3-veined petals; staminodia short with 3—5 slender filaments.

Throughout the Rockies at high altitudes on the gravelly borders of
alpine ponds or brooks, a very diminutive species, flowering in July.




SAXIFRAGACEÆ

_Saxifrage Family_


Stemmed or stemless herbs with alternate or sometimes opposite or
more frequently basal leaves; flowers perfect, racemose, cymose or
paniculate; calyx 5-lobed or parted; petals 4 or 5, white, yellow or
greenish or sometimes rose-coloured; stamens equal or twice the number
of the petals; carpels 1—several, distinct or united.

    Placentæ parietal.
       Flowers solitary and axillary; sepals 4; stamens 4—8.
                                                       =Chrysosplenium.=
       Flowers in more or less elongated racemes.
          Flowers with 2 or 3 equal carpels.
             Flower-stalk axial from a bulbiferous rootstock.
                                                         =Lithophragma.=
             Flower-stalk a lateral shoot from a stout scaly rootstock.
                Inflorescence racemose.
                   Petals pinnately cut or pinnatifid.
                      Base of the calyx campanulate deeper than the
                       length of the sepals.                  =Tellima.=

                      Base of the calyx saucer-shaped, shallower
                       than the length of the sepals.
                         Ovary more than half superior;
                          disc inconspicuous.                 =Mitella.=
                         Ovary wholly inferior, covered with
                          the prominent disc.              =Pectiantia.=

                Inflorescence paniculate.                    =Heuchera.=

             Flowers with 2 very unequal carpels.            =Tiarella.=

    Placentæ axial.
       Base of the calyx well developed, at maturity longer than
        the sepals.
       Stamens 5, plant with short bulblet bearing rootstock. =Hemieva.=
       Stamens 10.
          Plants without caudices; only producing annual flowering
           stems.                                           =Saxifraga.=
          Plants with perennial leafy caudices, often with offsets.
                                                             =Muscaria.=
    Base of the calyx only slightly developed, unchanged at maturity.
       Leaves alternate, sometimes all basal.
          Plants stemless.
             Corolla regular, petals about equal in shape and length.
                                                           =Micranthes.=
             Corolla irregular petals of different shape and length.
                                                           =Spatularia.=
          Plants with stems.
             Carpels distinct; leaf-blades toothed.       =Leptarrhena.=
             Carpels partially united; leaf-blades entire.   =Leptasea.=
       Leaves opposite except sometimes on the flower-stalks.
                                                           =Antiphylla.=

[Sidenote: =Chrysosplenium tetrandrum= Th. Fries. _Golden Saxifrage._]

Perennial with a slender creeping rootstock; stems 1½—6 inches high,
branched above. Leaves alternate, the lower ones on petioles 1—2 inches
long; blades thick, reniform, ½ an inch or less wide, crenate with 3—5
broad teeth, shining above, paler beneath, upper ones larger and more
or less wedge-shaped. Flowers in small clusters in the axils of the
upper leaves; sepals 4; stamens 4 opposite the sepals.

In shaded damp ground in the wooded areas through the Rockies at an
elevation of 5000 to 6000 feet, where it often forms dense green
carpets, the inconspicuous little flowers coming into blossom in June.

[Sidenote: =Lithophragma parviflora= (Hook.) Nutt. _Lithophragma._]

Stems 4—12 inches high, slightly glandular-hairy, from a slender
creeping rootstock with rosy bulblets. Leaves palmately divided to the
base into 3—5 divisions, ½—1 inch long, twice ternately cleft into
oblong or linear divisions; lower ones on petioles 1—2 inches long;
stem leaves 1 or 2 similar, sessile. Flowers 3—8 in a slender raceme,
base of the calyx and sepals ⅛ of an inch long; petals pure white,
deeply 3—5 cut into narrowly oblong divisions.

On grassy slopes and gravelly places throughout the Rockies; flowering
in June.

[Sidenote: =Tellima grandiflora= (Pursh.) Dougl. _Tellima._]

Flowering branches 1—2 feet high, with long rough hairs, glandular
above. Leaves reniform or cordate, sparingly rough-hairy, round
lobed, and toothed with broadly ovate teeth; 1½—4 inches broad on
hairy petioles 4—8 inches long; stem leaves short-petioled with
well developed stipules. Flowers numerous in an elongated raceme;
sepals ovate ¼ of an inch long; petals white, purplish or pink with a
pinnately cut blade; claws broadly wedge-shaped, ⅛ of an inch long,
erect, blade spreading or reflexed with a rounded ovate body and
tapering thread-like lobes.

Moist woods and crevices in the rocks, abundant in the Selkirks;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Mitella nuda= L. _Naked Bishop’s-Cap._]

Perennial, from a slender branched rootstock, producing long runners
in late summer; flowering branches scape-like, naked, or rarely with
a small leaf, 2—8 inches high, sparingly hairy. Leaves reniform ¾—2
inches in diameter, rounded, crenate or lobed, on petioles 1—3 inches
long. Flowers few, in a loose raceme, saucer-shaped; calyx about ¼ of
an inch broad, greenish-yellow; petals spreading about twice as long
as the sepals, greenish-yellow, pinnately divided into thread-like
divisions, resembling snow crystals in form.

Common in the cool woods and shaded mossy bogs throughout the Rockies;
flowering in June.

[Illustration: Mitella nuda L. (⅔ Nat.) Naked Bishop’s-Cap.]

[Illustration: Pectiantia pentandra (Hook.) Rydb. (¼ Nat.) Mitrewort.]

[Sidenote: =Pectiantia pentandra= (Hook.) Rydb. _Mitrewort._]

Flowering branches scape-like, 4—12 inches high, naked. Leaves broadly
crenate with 9—11 more or less distinct round lobes, thin, 1—2½ inches
broad on petioles, 2—4 inches long. Flowers ⅛ of an inch broad in a
slender loose raceme, green or often purplish inside; sepals broadly
triangular-ovate, obtuse, and recurved; petals yellowish, deeply cut
into slender thread-like divisions, twice as long as the calyx; stamens
5, opposite the petals.

Throughout the region in cool woods and shaded springy spots; flowering
in early June at the higher altitudes.

[Sidenote: =Pectiantia Breweri= (A. Gray.) Rydb. _Mitrewort._]

Flowering branches 4—8 inches high, leafless. Leaves thin, broadly
reniform with many shallow rounded lobes; petioles 2—4 inches long.
Flowers in a loose raceme, green, occasionally in pairs; calyx ⅛ of
an inch wide; sepals obtuse and reflexed; petals deeply cut into
thread-like divisions about twice as long as the sepals; stamens 5,
opposite the sepals.

In damp woods throughout the region, growing with the previous species;
flowering in early June.

[Sidenote: =Heuchera glabra= Willd. _Smooth Alum-root._]

Flowering stems slender, 4—20 inches high, smooth, 1—3-leaved. Basal
leaves on petioles, 2—8 inches long, cordate, deeply 5—7-lobed, thin,
shining, 1—4 inches broad and as long or slightly longer, lobes
triangular-ovate, acute, doubly and sharply serrate. Flowers in a
loose panicle 2—6 inches long; calyx with the turbinate base about ⅛
of an inch long, sparingly fringed with hairs; petals white, broadly
spatulate, acute, about twice as long as the sepals; stamens much
exserted, with scarlet and orange anthers.

On damp shaded rocks, especially abundant in the Selkirks in the
vicinity of Glacier.

[Sidenote: =Heuchera ovalifolia= Nutt. _Round-leaved Alum-root._]

Flowering branches naked, densely glandular-hairy, 1—2 feet high.
Leaves round-oval, ½—1½ inches broad, ¾—2 inches long, rounded,
slightly heart-shaped at the base, round-lobed and crenate with
bristle-tipped teeth. Flowers in a short dense raceme less than 4
inches long, the deeply campanulate, yellowish, densely hairy base of
the calyx, with the broadly oblong sepals ¼ of an inch long, petals
usually wanting.

On dry rocky banks and hillsides throughout the region, flowering in
midsummer.

[Sidenote: =Tiarella unifoliata= Hook. _Foam-Flower._]

Flowering branches 6—15 inches high, 1—4-leaved. Leaves broadly
cordate, coarsely 3—5-lobed with broadly ovate-acute lobes, doubly
crenate with mucronate teeth; stem leaves short-petioled, basal, on
petioles 2—6 inches long. Flowers in a narrow panicle; sepals whitish
ovate-oblong, ¹/₁₆ of an inch long, the linear-subulate, white petals
and stamens fully three times as long; carpels oblong acute, nearly
half an inch long in fruit.

Abundant in damp rich woods throughout the region oftentimes carpeting
the ground; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Hemieva ranunculifolia= (Hook.) Raf. _Hemieva._]

Light yellowish-green; stems 8—10 inches high from a rosy-bulbous
rootstock. Leaves ternately divided to the base, the middle division
broadly wedge-shaped, ½—1 inch long, rounded, 3-lobed, the lateral ones
oblique and 4-lobed; basal, on petioles 2—4 inches long, stem leaves
on short petioles dilated at the base, the uppermost sessile, merely
3-lobed at the apex. Flowers showy in a short dense corymb; the base of
the calyx and sepals yellowish-green about ⅛ of an inch long; petals
white or yellowish, broadly spatulate, ¼ of an inch long; stamens 5,
opposite the sepals, filaments and carpels more or less rosy in colour.

On wet rocky slopes in the Selkirks at Glacier, not common; flowering
in June.

[Illustration: Saxifraga cernua L. (⅔ Nat.) Nodding Saxifrage.]

[Illustration: Saxifraga rivularis L. (⅔ Nat.) Alpine Brook Saxifrage.]

[Sidenote: =Saxifraga rivularis= L. _Alpine Brook Saxifrage._]

Stems 1—3½ inches tall, tufted, smooth or finely glandular-hairy.
Leaves reniform in outline, ⅛—½ an inch broad, thick, mainly 3-lobed,
those of the stem sometimes entire, short petioled or sessile; basal
leaves on slender petioles an inch or more long. Flowers small, base
of the calyx and sepals ⅛ of an inch long; petals oblong, or broadly
wedge-shaped, white, slightly larger than the sepals.

An inconspicuous little plant growing on wet rocks and beside alpine
brooks at high altitudes throughout the region; flowering during
midsummer.

[Sidenote: =Saxifraga cernua= L. _Nodding Bulbous Saxifrage._]

Stems 3—8 inches tall, leafy, somewhat glandular-hairy, growing in
groups. Leaves reniform in outline ⅓—1 inch wide; the basal and lower
stem-leaves long-petioled prominently, 3—7 lobed, the lobes linear
to triangular-lanceolate; the upper stem leaves, 3—5-lobed. Flowers
represented by clusters of rosy bulblets, except a single terminal
one with the base of the calyx and sepals ¼ of an inch long, and
wedge-shaped, the clawless white petals nearly half an inch long.

A rather striking alpine plant growing on wet rocks at Lake Louise and
Moraine Lake; flowering in midsummer.

[Sidenote: =Muscaria adscendens= (L.) Small. _Muscaria._]

Somewhat glandular-hairy, 1—4 inches tall. Leaves ⅛—¼ of an inch long,
mainly wedge-shaped or spatulate, 3-toothed or those of the stem
entire. Flower-stalks sparingly branched above or throughout; sepals
ovate or oblong-ovate ¹/₁₆—⅛ of an inch long, acute or obtuse; petals
white, wedge-shaped to oblong wedge-shaped, a third longer than the
sepals, the claws slender or stout.

An alpine species with rosettes of basal leaves, not infrequent
throughout the Rockies, along streams, and on shaded rocks; flowering
in midsummer.

[Illustration: Muscaria cæspitosa (L.) Haw. (½ Nat.) Tufted Saxifrage.]

[Illustration: Micranthes rhomboidea (Greene) Small. (⅓ Nat.) Mountain
Saxifrage.]

[Sidenote: =Muscaria cæspitosa= (L.) Haw. _Tufted Saxifrage._]

Glandular-hairy, 2—6 inches tall. Leaves crowded at the base, sometimes
densely so; blades ¼—¾ of an inch long, 3-lobed at the apex, the lobes
lanceolate or linear. Flower-stalks stout, 3-few-flowered, each bearing
2—3 leaves, base of the calyx ⅛ to ³/₁₆ of an inch high, turbinate at
the base, sepals ovate to ovate-lanceolate, ¹/₁₆—⅛ of an inch long;
petals white, narrowly obovate or oblong-ovate, ¼ of an inch or more
long, rounded at the apex.

An alpine species growing on moist, shaded rocks throughout the
Rockies, frequent, often forming tufts of considerable size; flowering
in June.

[Sidenote: =Micranthes rhomboidea= (Greene) Small. _Alpine Saxifrage._]

Leaves forming a rosette, spreading or ascending ¾—2 inches long, ovoid
or rhombic-ovoid, obtuse, crenulate or dentate-serrate, nearly smooth
except the ciliate margins, mainly green, sometimes purplish beneath,
abruptly or gradually narrowed into petiole-like bases, which are
occasionally larger than the blades. Flowers in a compact terminal head
on a copiously glandular, naked scape 3—10 inches high; sepals ovate to
triangular ¹/₁₆—⅛ of an inch long barely if at all ciliate, 3-veined;
petals white, obovate or oblong-ovate, twice as long as the sepals,
notched at the apex, seed pods green or purplish, the points spreading.

A frequent alpine plant in the more or less moist, shaded situations
throughout the Rockies; flowering in July.

[Illustration: Micranthes Nelsoniana (D. Don.) Small. (½ Nat.) Nelson’s
Saxifrage.]

[Illustration: Micranthes Lyallii (Engler) Small. (⅔ Nat.) Lyall’s
Saxifrage.]

[Sidenote: =Micranthes Lyallii= (Engler) Small. _Lyall’s Saxifrage._]

Leaves erect or ascending ½—2½ inches long, fan-shaped varying to
suborbicular, typically wedge-shaped at the base, coarsely few-toothed
above with the teeth mainly directed forward, smooth or nearly so, the
petiole-like bases often longer than the blades. Flowering stems 3—24
inches tall, smooth or nearly so, sparingly branched above, commonly
purple, few-flowered; petals white with 2 yellow blotches below the
middle, broadly oblong or suborbicular, often slightly notched at
the apex, twice as long as the sepals, often tinged and streaked
with red on the outside; seed pods nearly ½ an inch high, purple or
purple-tinged, usually 3 or 4 together, with pointed beaks.

An alpine form frequent throughout the region in damp, shady, or open
places and along the borders of mountain streams; a rather striking
plant, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Micranthes Nelsoniana= (D. Don.) Small. _Nelson’s
Saxifrage._]

Leaves erect or ascending, 1—5 inches long, suborbicular or reniform,
¾—1¾ inches in diameter, deeply cordate at the base, usually sparingly
hairy on both sides, coarsely few-toothed with crenate, gland-tipped
teeth. Flower-stem erect, 1½—7 inches tall, glandular-villous,
especially above, terminating in a compact head usually with purple
or purplish bracts; sepals ovate or oblong-ovate ⅙—⅛ of an inch long,
ciliate; petals white, broadly oblong to ovate, twice as long as the
sepals.

A rather rare though very beautiful alpine flower found throughout the
region in moist places and along alpine brooks; flowering in June.

[Illustration: Spatularia Brunoniana (Bong.) Small. (¼ Nat.) Tall
Saxifrage.]

[Illustration: Leptasea austromontana (Wiegand) Small. (⅓ Nat.) Common
Saxifrage.]

[Sidenote: =Spatularia Brunoniana= Bong. _Tall Saxifrage._]

Copiously glandular-hairy, 4—15 inches tall. Leaves crowded on the
short rootstock, spatulate to oblanceolate-spatulate, 1—3 inches
long, sharply and sometimes broadly toothed, mostly above the middle.
Flower-stems solitary or several together, widely branching, bracts
much smaller than the leaves; flowers terminating the stem, branches,
and branchlets, but on many of the ultimate branchlets represented by
clusters of green bulblets; sepals oblong-ovate to triangular-ovate, ⅙
of an inch or less long, purple, reflexed; petals white, ¼ of an inch
long or less, the three upper with lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate
blades; two lower with elliptic or spatulate-elliptic blades; seed
pods ¼ of an inch long with diverging tips. The commonest form in the
Selkirks, everywhere along streams and banks.

[Sidenote: =Leptarrhena pyrolifolia= (D. Don.) R. Br. _Leptarrhena._]

Caudex horizontal or ascending, clothed with folded leaf bases. Leaves
leathery, oblong, or sometimes slightly broadest above or below
the middle, 1½—3½ inches long, obtuse, serrate or crenate-serrate,
deep green and lustrous above, paler beneath, narrowed into winged
petiole-like bases. Flower-stalks 4—18 inches high, bearing 1 or 2
clasping leaves; flowers small and inconspicuous, at first congested in
a compact head, becoming separated; sepals ovate, about as long as the
base of the calyx, each with a terminal gland and usually some lateral
glands; petals narrowly spatulate, white, ⅛ of an inch long; seed pods
¼ of an inch long with slightly spreading tips; purplish.

Along alpine streams and in damp shaded places, rather abundant
throughout the region at the higher altitudes; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Leptasea Van-Bruntiæ= Small. _Fleshy Saxifrage._]

Stems decumbent. Leaves ⅛—½ of an inch long, the blades very thick,
flattish, smooth, ciliate on the margins, spine-tipped. Flowers
1—several on stalks, 1½—3 inches tall, finely glandular-hairy, leafy,
bearing larger leaves than the decumbent stems; sepals ovate to
oblong-ovate, ⅛ of an inch long, smooth, more or less eroded at the
apex; petals deep yellow, oblong, much longer than the calyx; seed pods
¼ of an inch or more long.

A common species throughout the Rockies, forming mats on the wet gravel
and sand of the shores and flood-plains of the rivers and torrent fans
at the bases of the moraines; flowering throughout June and July.

[Sidenote: =Leptasea austromontana= (Wiegand) Small. _Common
Saxifrage._]

Leaves of the caudices ½ an inch or less long, stiff and crowded, but
more or less spreading, the blades narrowly lanceolate to subulate,
ciliate, slender, spine-tipped. Flower-stalks 1½—6 inches tall, nearly
smooth or finely glandular-hairy, bearing several leaves which are
smaller than those of the caudices; sepals ovate, sometimes rather
narrowly so, ⅛ of an inch long, smooth or sparingly ciliate, obtuse;
petals white, usually yellow-spotted, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, ¼ of
an inch or more long, filaments slender; seed pods often nearly ½ an
inch long.

Common everywhere throughout the Rockies at the lower altitudes on bare
rocks and stony slopes, frequently forming mats a foot or more across;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Antiphylla oppositifolia= (L.) Fourr. _Purple Saxifrage._]

Plants in dense mats, leaves densely folded together except on the
flower-stalks and sometimes on the elongated stems, 4-ranked, the
blades obovate to spatulate, ¼ of an inch long, ciliate, keeled.
Flower-stalks ½—1 inch long or sometimes shorter when young, leafy;
sepals oblong to ovate, ⅛ of an inch long, ciliate all around; petals
lilac or purple, elliptic or oval, showy, ⅓ of an inch long, each
narrowed into a stout claw.

Usually a high alpine species and not infrequently forming mats of
considerable size; throughout the region, flowering in July.




GROSSULARIACEÆ

_Gooseberry Family_


Shrubs, usually with lobed, petioled leaves and racemose or
subsolitary axillary or lateral flowers, the pedicels bracteolate;
calyx tube attached to the ovary, the limb 4—5-lobed, often coloured;
petals, 4—5, inserted on the throat of the calyx, small, scale-like,
often included; stamens 4—5, inserted with the petals; berry globose or
ovoid, pulpy, the calyx persistent on its summit.

[Sidenote: =Ribes lacustre= (Pers.) Poir. _Swamp Gooseberry._]

Stems prostrate or ascending, 3—4 feet long, very prickly when young,
spines slender and weak, generally clustered. Leaves nearly orbicular,
thin, smooth or hairy along the veins beneath, deeply 5—7 lobed, 1—2
inches broad, the lobes acutish, incised-dentate. Flowers in racemes of
5—9; calyx rotate, ⅙ of an inch broad, spreading, green or purplish;
petals exceeding the calyx; ovary glandular-hispid; berry black.

A very abundant gooseberry throughout the region in cool damp woods and
bogs at the lower elevations; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Ribes setosum= Lindl. _Bristly Gooseberry._]

Stems erect, 3—4 feet high, with numerous stout bristles, especially
on the young wood; axillary spines 1—3 together, rather stout and
spreading. Leaves slender-petioled, more or less finely hairy, at least
when young, ½—1 inch wide, broadly ovate or orbicular, 3—5-lobed, the
lobes incised or coarsely toothed. Flowers 2—3, ¼—½ an inch long on
very short pedicels; calyx tube cylindric, greenish-white or pinkish;
petals white; berries small, purple or blue and very sour.

Frequent throughout the Rockies on lake shores and in thickets at the
lower altitudes; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Ribes oxyacanthoides= L. _Northern Gooseberry._]

Spines generally solitary, light-coloured, ¼—½ of an inch long;
prickles commonly wanting. Leaves petioled, roundish, subcordate and
5-lobed, hairy or nearly smooth, the lobes deeply toothed or crenate.
Flowers greenish-purple or white, little more than ¼ of an inch long;
berry half an inch in diameter, smooth, reddish-purple and sweet when
ripe.

Throughout the Rockies at the lower elevations, in open ground and on
stony hillsides; flowering in June; fruit ripening in July.

[Sidenote: =Ribes Howellii= Greene. _Howell’s Currant._]

Stems ascending, crowded, 2—5 feet high, without spines. Leaves
triangular, 2—3 inches in diameter, cordate at the base, deeply
5-lobed, the acute lobes doubly serrate, smooth above, often
resinous-dotted beneath, petiole as long as or longer than the
blade. Flowers ⅓ of an inch broad in a loose raceme, bracts linear,
about ¹/₁₆ of an inch long, much shorter than the slender, glandular
pedicels; calyx rotate with broad spatulate lobes; petals red, narrowly
spatulate, shorter than the calyx lobes; berries red.

A rather showy plant with a pungent, skunk-like odour when bruised,
growing on wet, shaded rocks and in springy places throughout the
region, at the lower altitudes; flowering in June.




ROSACEÆ

_Rose Family._


Herbs, shrubs, or trees with alternate leaves and perfect flowers;
calyx free or adnate to the ovary, 5—9-lobed; petals equal in number
to the calyx lobes, distinct or none; stamens usually numerous and
distinct; fruit mostly follicles or achenes.

    Carpels few; in fruit becoming 2-several sided.
    Stamens united at the base; flowers racemose.              =Lutkea.=
    Stamens not united at the base; flowers in panicles or corymbs.
       Shrubs with simple leaves, flowers perfect.             =Spiræa.=
       Herbs with compound leaves; flowers diœcious.          =Aruncus.=
    Carpels few or many; in fruit becoming achenes or drupelets.
       Fruit consisting of drupelets, usually united.           =Rubus.=
       Fruit consisting of achenes.
          Achenes enclosed in a fleshy fruit; prickly shrubs.    =Rosa.=
          Achenes on a plane or concave receptacle; herbs.
             Styles deciduous, naked.
             Styles terminal.                              =Potentilla.=
             Styles lateral.
             Carpels hairy; shrubs.                         =Dasyphora.=
             Carpels smooth; herbs.
                Stamens 5; carpels 10—15.                   =Sibbaldia.=
                Stamens 20; carpels numerous.
                   Leaves trifoliate; receptacle fleshy.     =Fragaria.=
                   Leaves pinnate; receptacle not fleshy.
                      Flowers dark purple.                    =Comarum.=
                      Flowers yellow.
                         Plant with stolons; flowers solitary.
                                                            =Argentina.=
             Styles persistent, mostly plumose.
                Calyx lobes and petals 8 or 9.                  =Dryas.=
                Calyx lobes and petals 5.
                   Style jointed, upper part deciduous.          =Geum.=
                   Style not jointed, upper part plumose.   =Sieversia.=

[Illustration: Tiarella unifoliata Hook. (¼ Nat.) Western Foam-Flower.]

[Illustration: Lutkea pectinata (Pursh) Kuntze. (⅔ Nat.) Cut-Leaved
Lutkea.]

[Sidenote: =Lutkea pectinata= (Pursh.) Kuntze. _Cut-leaved Lutkea._]

Smooth, stems cæspitose, very leafy. Leaves trifoliate, persistent,
leaflets deeply 2—4-lobed, the lateral ones decumbent, forming a broad
petiole. Flowering stems 2—6 inches high with a dense terminal raceme
of many white flowers, about ¼ of an inch broad; calyx lobes ovate,
acute; petals 5, obovate, exceeding the calyx; stamens numerous,
shorter than the petals.

Frequent throughout the Selkirks, on alpine slopes and beside streams
at the higher elevations; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Spiræa densiflora= Nutt. _Pink Spiræa._]

Stem 2—4 feet high, reddish. Leaves ovate or elliptical, serrulate at
the apex, entire below, narrowed at the base to a very short petiole or
the lowest sessile, dark green on both sides, ½—1 inch long. Flowers
small, deep rose-colour in dense, round, leafy, bracted corymbs,
terminating the numerous branches.

In moist, exposed, rocky places and on slopes at the lower altitudes,
frequent in the Selkirks; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Spiræa lucida= Dougl. _Birch-leaved Spiræa._]

Stems erect, mostly simple, 1—2 feet high, from horizontal running
rootstocks. Leaves, the lower ones small, obovate; upper, oval to
oblong, 1—2 inches long, often obscurely lobed and doubly serrate above
the middle, smooth throughout, dark green above, paler beneath. Flowers
white or tinged with pink in a large flat branching terminal corymb.

Abundant throughout the region on hillsides and dry banks; flowering
during July.

[Illustration: Rubus pedatus Smith. (⅔ Nat.) Creeping Raspberry.]

[Sidenote: =Aruncus Aruncus= (L.) Karst. _Goat’s-Beard._]

Smooth throughout, stem erect, somewhat branched, 2—4 feet high.
Leaves long-petioled, 2—3 pinnate, leaflets 1—3 inches long, ovate or
lanceolate, thin, acuminate or acute at the apex, rounded or slightly
heart-shaped at the base, doubly serrate or incised. Flowers small,
white, in an elongated spike.

Frequent along streams throughout the Selkirks; flowering during June
and July.

[Sidenote: =Rubus pedatus= Smith. _Creeping Raspberry._]

Stems slender, trailing, 1—3 feet long, unarmed, rooting at the
nodes, pubescent. Leaves trifoliate, leaflets obovate, cuneate at the
base, ¾—1 inch long incised, lateral leaflets often parted to the
base, smooth or sparingly hairy. Flowers usually solitary, on long
slender pedicels, white or rosy, ⅛ of an inch or more broad; sepals
ovate-lanceolate, entire or incised, exceeding the petals; berry of 1—6
large red, juicy drupelets.

Frequent throughout the region in cold damp woods, forming masses of
considerable size; flowering during June.

[Sidenote: =Rubus arcticus= L. _Arctic Raspberry._]

Stem low, herbaceous, unarmed, finely hairy, 3—10 inches high,
sometimes leafless below. Leaves 3-foliate, leaflets sessile or
short-stalked, rhombic-ovate or obovate, coarsely and unequally serrate
or slightly lobed, ¾—1 inch long. Flowers solitary or occasionally 2,
slender peduncled; petals obovate, pink, ½—1 inch long; sepals acute,
equalling or shorter than the petals, reflexed; berry light red,
fragrant and edible.

In cold mossy thickets and swamps throughout the region, the first
flowers appearing in May and early June when the stems are but a
few inches high, with the leaves hardly unfolded; in midsummer it
frequently flowers again from branched stems 8—10 inches high and
appearing like a different plant.

[Sidenote: =Rubus Americanus= (Pers.) Britton. _Dwarf Raspberry._]

Stems herbaceous, trailing or ascending, unarmed, 6—18 inches or more
long, somewhat hairy. Leaves petioled, 3-foliate or rarely 5-foliate
leaflets rhombic-ovate, smooth or nearly so, acute, the lateral ones
mostly rounded, terminal, wedge-shaped at the base, all sharply
serrate. Flowers 1—3 on a slender glandular-hairy peduncle, ½ an inch
or less broad; petals 5—7, white, spatulate-oblong, erect, rather
longer than the acuminate calyx lobes; fruit red-purple, half an inch
long.

In cold moist woods and swampy places throughout the region; flowering
in May and June.

[Sidenote: =Rubus parviflorus= Nutt. _Salmon-berry._]

Stems shrubby, 3—8 feet high, smooth or more or less glandular-hairy.
Leaves round-cordate in outline, palmately 3—5-lobed, the lobes acute
or acutish, rarely acuminate, coarsely and unequally serrate. Flowers
few, 1—2 inches broad, white, in corymbose, terminal heads, calyx lobes
tipped with a long slender appendage.

Borders of woods, and in thickets among rocks, throughout the region,
but most abundant in the Selkirks; flowering in June and July.

[Illustration: Rubus parviflorus Nutt. (⅔ Nat.) Salmon-Berry.]

[Sidenote: =Rubus strigosus= Michx. _Wild Red Raspberry._]

Stems shrubby, biennial, 18 inches to 4 feet high, usually densely
clothed with weak glandular bristles or the older stems with small
hooked prickles. Leaves pinnately 3—5-foliate, leaflets ovate or
ovate-oblong, acuminate, sharply and irregularly serrate or slightly
lobed, rounded at the base, 1—3 inches long. Flowers ½ an inch broad
in a loose raceme on slender pedicels, curved in fruit; petals white,
ascending, about equalling the spreading acuminate sepals; fruit dark
red, sweet and very juicy.

The common red raspberry throughout the region in dry and rocky places;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Dasyphora fruticosa= (L.) Rydb. _Shrubby Cinquefoil._]

Shrubby, much branched; stems erect or ascending, very leafy, 6 inches
to 3 feet high, the bark shreddy. Leaves pinnate with 5—7 oblong,
entire, acute leaflets, with long silky hairs and revolute margins.
Flowers bright yellow, ¾—1½ inches broad, usually solitary at the ends
of the branches.

A very abundant plant throughout the region, in swampy grounds,
gravelly river shores, on dry slopes and alpine meadows, flowering
throughout the summer.

[Sidenote: =Sibbaldia procumbens= L. _Sibbaldia._]

Stems densely tufted, decumbent or creeping, 1—4 inches long.
Leaves 3-foliate, leaflets wedge-shaped, 3—5-toothed at the apex
with scattered hairs on both sides. Flowers ¼ of an inch broad,
greenish-yellow; petals very small, not exceeding the calyx.

Frequent throughout the region on rocks, usually in dry, exposed
situations at elevations varying from 4000 to 10,000 feet; flowering
during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Fragaria glauca= (S. Wats.) Rydb. _Wild Strawberry._]

Plant spreading, 3—6 inches tall, hairy, forming new plants by the
running stems after flowering. Leaves tufted from the root, very
hairy, palmately 3-foliate; leaflets obtuse, strongly serrate, the
teeth gland-tipped; lateral leaflets ovate, oblique on the inside,
shorter than the terminal one; terminal leaflet broadly ovate with a
wedge-shaped base. Flowers white, ¾ of an inch broad; petals slightly
longer than the sepals, borne on a scape about ⅓ longer than the
leaves. Fruit ovoid, rather small.

On grassy banks and roadsides throughout the Rockies; flowering in late
May and early June.

[Illustration: Fragaria glauca (S. Wats.) Rydb. (½ Nat.) Wild
Strawberry.]

[Illustration: Amelanchier florida Lindl. (⅓ Nat.) Service-Berry.]

[Sidenote: =Comarum palustre= (L.) _Marsh Cinquefoil._]

Smooth, decumbent at the base, 6 inches to 2 feet long. Leaves pinnate,
the lower long-petioled with 5—7 oblong or oblanceolate, sharply
serrate leaflets, which are lighter-coloured and more or less hairy
beneath; upper leaflets similar, 3—5. Flowers few, in an open cyme;
calyx lobes purple within, acuminate, nearly ½ an inch long, enlarging
in fruit; petals much shorter than the sepals.

A marsh plant frequent throughout the region in very wet situations, at
the lower altitudes; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Argentina Anserina= (L.) Rydb. _Silver-weed._]

Herbaceous, spreading by runners. Leaves all at the root, interruptedly
pinnate with 7—21 leaflets and smaller ones interposed; oblong, sharply
serrate, dark green above, soft, white-hairy beneath. Flowers bright
yellow, ½—1 inch broad, solitary on long pedicels, petals exceeding the
ovate, acute, calyx lobes.

In open and waste ground and meadows throughout the Rockies at the
lower altitudes; flowering during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Potentilla nivea= L. _Snowy Cinquefoil._]

Stem 4—8 inches high, woody at the base, with long silky hairs. Leaves
3-foliate, the lower petioled; leaflets oblong or obovate, usually
deeply cut, densely, white-hairy beneath, green and loosely soft-hairy
above, ¾—1 inch long. Flowers 1—5, bright yellow, ½—¾ of an inch broad;
sepals silky, lanceolate, shorter than the broadly ovate, notched
petals.

Frequent throughout the Rockies in open, rocky situations; flowering
during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Potentilla dissecta= Pursh. _Cut-leaved Cinquefoil._]

Stem decumbent or ascending 4—8 inches high from a woody base, more or
less silky-villous or nearly smooth. Leaves pinnate or tripinnate with
5—7 lanceolate, deeply cut leaflets, usually glaucous and with ciliate
edges. Flowers few, bright yellow, ½ an inch or more broad with notched
petals, in an open cyme.

In open alpine meadows and slopes throughout the region at the higher
altitudes; flowering during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Potentilla multisecta= (Wats.) Rydb.]

Much like the preceding species but much more hairy throughout and with
more divided leaves. Flowers in a loose cyme on scapes 4—6 inches high,
not quite so large as in the preceding nor as brilliantly coloured.

Dry rocky summits and ledges throughout the Rockies; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Potentilla uniflora= (Ledeb.) _Alpine Cinquefoil._]

Densely cæspitose from a woody base. Leaves closely tufted, small,
palmately divided, leaflets deeply cut, densely white-woolly on both
surfaces. Flowers solitary on short peduncles, bright yellow, half an
inch or more broad; petals broadly obovate, notched at the apex, much
longer than the densely soft-hairy lanceolate sepals.

A high alpine species in dry stony ground throughout the Rockies, not
common; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Geum macrophyllum= Willd. _Large-leaved Avens._]

Stout, erect, stiff-hairy, 1—3 feet high. Leaves lyrate-pinnate with
broad foliaceous stipules, basal leaves petioled, the terminal segment
much the largest, reniform, dentate, 3—7-lobed; lateral leaflets 3—6
oval or obovate with smaller ones interspersed. Flowers several, short
peduncled, borne in a terminal head; bright yellow, nearly ½ an inch
broad; petals longer than the acuminate sepals; receptacle nearly
smooth.

In damp places and low grounds throughout the region, most abundant in
the Selkirks; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Geum strictum= Ait. _Yellow Avens._]

Hairy, branched above, 2—4 feet high. Stipules broad, foliaceous; basal
leaves lyrate-pinnate; leaflets 5—7, obovate, cuneate, dentate or
lobed, the terminal one largest, broadly ovate or cuneate, stem leaves
sessile or short-petioled with 3—5 ovate or oblong, acute segments.
Flowers yellow, ½ an inch broad; receptacle downy.

In swamps or low grounds throughout the region; flowering in June.

[Illustration: _a_ Geum strictum Ait. Yellow Avens.

_b_ Sieversia ciliata (Pursh) Don. Long-Plumed Purple Avens.

(⅔ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Sieversia ciliata= (Pursh.) Don. _Long-Plumed Purple
Avens._]

Soft-hairy, scapose; scape 4—18 inches high, simple, 3—8-flowered at
the summit. Basal leaves petioled, interruptedly pinnate with many
small leaflets, among the numerous obovate, deeply cut larger ones.
Flowers ½ an inch broad of 5 pale purplish-pink petals hardly exceeding
the calyx and spreading linear red bractlets; styles plumose in fruit,
1—2 inches long.

In dry open grounds extending into the Rockies from the plains, where
it is especially abundant, to the lower slopes and valleys throughout
the region; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Dryas octopetala= L. _White Mountain Avens._]

Stems prostrate, branched, 3—6 inches long. Leaves oblong or ovate,
½—1 inch long, obtuse at each end, closely crenate, dark green and
shining above, densely white-woolly beneath. Flowers solitary on
slender pedicels, white, an inch or more broad; petals longer than the
6—8 spreading linear sepals; stamens numerous, anthers bright yellow;
styles conspicuously plumose in fruit.

Frequent in dry stony ground throughout the Rockies at elevations
ranging from 4000 to 10,000 feet, forming dense mats of considerable
size on the surface of the ground; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Dryas Drummondii= Richards. _Drummond’s Mountain Avens._]

Similar in manner of growth and general appearance to the preceding
species. Leaves generally narrower at the base, the lobes
dentate-crenate. Flowers ½ an inch long, campanulate, drooping on a
densely woolly pedicel; sepals ovate, acute, black glandular-hairy;
petals lanceolate, obtuse, bright yellow, about twice the length of the
sepals; stamens included; styles numerous, conspicuously plumose in
fruit.

In gravel and loose stony soil throughout the Rockies, especially
abundant on river shores and flood-plains, like the previous species
frequently forming mats of considerable size; flowering in June.

[Illustration: _a_ Dryas octopetala L. White Mountain Avens.

_b_ Dryas Drummondii Rich. Drummond’s Mountain Avens.

(⅞ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Rosa Macounii= Greene. _Macoun’s Rose._]

Stems branched, 2—3 feet high, prickly. Leaves pinnate, leaflets large,
¾—1½ inches long, oval, coarsely toothed. Flowers solitary, on slender
pedicels, bright pink, petals broadly obovate, an inch or more long,
sepals entire with a long acuminate obtuse tip, persistent and erect in
fruit, fruit globose, bright scarlet.

The wild rose of the region, in open ground, on slopes, borders of
woods, stream and river banks throughout the Rockies; flowering in late
June and early July.




POMACEÆ

_Apple Family_


Trees and shrubs with alternate leaves, and regular, perfect flowers;
calyx superior, 5-toothed; petals 5; stamens numerous; fruit a more or
less fleshy pome.

    Leaves pinnate.                                          =Sorbus.=
    Leaves simple, entire-toothed or lobed.             =Amelanchier.=

[Sidenote: =Sorbus sambucifolia= (Cham. and Schl.) Roem _Western
Mountain-ash._]

A small tree with smooth bark. Leaves pinnate, leaflets 5—15,
ovate-lanceolate or oval, obtuse or short-pointed, serrate, smooth
and dark green above, pale and usually more or less hairy beneath,
especially along the veins, seldom over 2½ inches long. Flowers white,
nearly ½ an inch across in a compound flat cyme, 2—4 inches broad;
petals spreading, short-clawed, obovate; stamens numerous; fruit bright
scarlet, more than ¼ of an inch in diameter.

In moist stony ground throughout the region; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Amelanchier alnifolia= Nutt. _North-western June-berry._]

A shrub, soft-hairy when young, at length nearly smooth. Leaves thick,
broadly elliptic or almost orbicular, very obtuse and often truncate
at the apex, round or subcordate at the base; coarsely dentate above
the middle. 1—2 inches long. Flowers in rather short, dense racemes,
pedicels short; petals oblanceolate, ¼—¾ of an inch long, 2—4 times the
length of the calyx; fruit purple when ripe and very sweet.

On slopes at the lower altitudes throughout the region, flowering in
June.




DRUPACEÆ

_Plum Family_


Trees or shrubs, the bark exuding gum. Leaves alternate, petioled,
serrate, the teeth and petiole often glandular; flowers regular,
perfect; calyx 5-lobed inferior, deciduous; petals 5, inserted on the
calyx; stamens numerous, inserted on the petals; fruit a 1-seeded drupe.

[Sidenote: =Prunus demissa= (Nutt.) Walp. _Western Wild Cherry._]

A shrub or small tree. Leaves thick ovate or broadly oval, acute or
slightly obtuse, serrulate with short teeth. Flowers ¼ of an inch or
more broad, in drooping racemes at the ends of the leafy branches;
drupe dark purple or black, globose, over ¼ of an inch in diameter.

In thickets in the Rockies, frequent in the vicinity of Banff;
flowering in May and early June.




PAPILIONACEÆ

_Pea Family_


Herbs or vines with alternate, compound leaves and irregular, perfect,
yellow, purple, blue, or white flowers, mainly in racemes; calyx
4—5-toothed; petals more or less united or separate, consisting of a
broad upper one (standard), two lateral ones (wings), and two front
ones more or less united (keel).

    Herbs; leaves unequally pinnate, not tendril-bearing.
       Pods not jointed.
          Keel of the corolla blunt.
             Pod not much swollen, fleshy, leathery or papery;
              flowers blue or purple.                      =Astragalus.=
             Pods much inflated, membranous; flowers white.     =Phaca.=
             Pods flat, both sutures prominent externally.  =Homalobus.=
          Keel of the corolla acute.                        =Aragallus.=
       Pods jointed, flowers purple or white.               =Hedysarum.=
    Herbaceous veins; leaves evenly pinnate, with tendrils.
    Style slender with a tuft of hairs at the summit.           =Vicia.=
    Style flattened, bearded along the inner side.           =Lathyrus.=

[Sidenote: =Astragalus adsurgens= Pall. _Ascending Milk-vetch._]

Stems whitish with close hairs or nearly smooth, ascending or
decumbent, 4—18 inches long, simple or branched at the base. Leaflets
15—25 oval or linear-oblong, sometimes notched at the apex, narrowed
at the base, ½—1 inch long; peduncles exceeding the leaves. Flowers
purplish, ½—¾ of an inch long in dense short spikes; calyx villous with
long partly black hairs, ½ the length of the corolla, with slender
teeth, half the length of the campanulate tube.

In open ground at low altitudes, probably the most frequent of the
vetches on the eastern slopes of the Rockies, often forming great
patches of blue during June.

[Sidenote: =Astragalus hypoglottis= L. _Purple Milk-vetch._]

Hairy or nearly smooth, stems decumbent or ascending, slender, branched
at the base, usually low, but ranging from 6—24 inches long. Leaves
2—5 inches long with 17—25 leaflets which are oblong or elliptic,
obtusish and usually notched at the apex, rounded at the base ¼—½ an
inch long. Flowers violet-purple, ½ to nearly an inch long in dense
heads, calyx nearly ⅓ the length with long black and white hairs.

Frequent at the lower altitudes, in dry ground and roadsides on the
eastern slopes of the Rockies, particularly in the region around Banff;
flowering in early June.

[Sidenote: =Astragalus alpinus= L. _Alpine Milk-vetch._]

Ascending or decumbent, branching from the base, 6—15 inches high,
slightly hairy or smooth. Leaves 2—5 inches long, with 13—25 oval or
elliptic, obtuse or retuse leaflets, narrowed or rounded at the base,
¼—½ an inch long. Flowers ½ an inch or more long, pale violet, the keel
commonly darker, in short rather open racemes; calyx about ⅓ the length
of the corolla, with short black hairs.

The most dainty of any of the vetches, frequent in rocky soil in
slightly shaded situations throughout the Rockies at the lower
altitudes; flowering during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Astragalus convallarius= Greene. _Slender Milk-vetch._]

Stems slender, ascending and rigid, 10—18 inches high, branching from
the base; hairy throughout. Leaves 3—6 inches long with 9—17 narrowly
linear, silky leaflets ½—1 inch long, remote. Flowers pale violet or
mauve, half an inch or more long, scattered in a slender raceme 3—5
inches long; peduncles much longer than the leaves; calyx about ⅓ the
length of the corolla with scattered white or brownish hairs.

On the eastern slopes of the Rockies in dry stony ground at the lower
altitudes; flowering in early June.

[Sidenote: =Astragalus Macouni= Rydb. _Macoun’s Vetch._]

Stems 18—24 inches high, stout and leafy, slightly striate and
nearly smooth. Leaves 2—4 inches long, thin, odd-pinnate with 4—8
pairs of obtuse, oblong, or oval leaflets, ½—1 inch long. Flower
scream-coloured, tinged with blue, in heads 1½—3 inches long, on
peduncles 4—10 inches long, from the axils of the upper leaves; calyx ⅛
of an inch long, black-hairy, lobes very slender and short; corolla ¼
of an inch or more long.

Frequent in more or less moist open ground throughout the Rockies at
varying altitudes; flowering during June and early July.

[Sidenote: =Phaca Americana= (Hook) Rydb. _Arctic Milk-vetch._]

Erect, nearly simple and smooth, 1—2 feet high. Leaves 3—6 inches
long with 7—17 oval or ovate-lanceolate obtuse leaflets, ¾—1½ inches
long. Flowers white, ¾ of an inch long in loose racemes on peduncles
equalling or exceeding the leaves; pedicels slender, ½ an inch long in
fruit; pod membranous, inflated, an inch long.

In moist or wet rocky shaded places throughout the Rockies; flowering
during June and early July.

[Illustration: Phaca americana (Hook.) Rydb. (½ Nat.) Arctic Vetch.]

[Illustration: Homalobus aboriginorum (Richards) Rydb. (⅓ Nat.) Indian
Vetch.]

[Sidenote: =Homalobus aboriginorum= (Richards) Rydb. _Indian Vetch._]

Stems erect and branching, 6—18 inches high, hairy throughout, from
an enlarged root. Leaves pinnate with 7—11 linear leaflets; stipules
ovate, acute, foliaceous. Flowers white, tinged with mauve, in a
loose raceme 1—2 inches long; peduncles longer than the leaves, calyx
black-hairy, about ⅛ of an inch long, with slender teeth nearly half as
much longer; corolla more than twice the length of the calyx.

An abundant species at the lower altitudes in open dry ground on the
eastern slopes of the Rockies; flowering in early June.

[Sidenote: =Aragallus monticola= (A. Gray) Greene. _Mountain Oxytrope._]

Silvery-pubescent throughout, with appressed or slightly spreading
hairs; tufted. Leaves basal, 3—6 inches long with 9—19 linear-oblong
or lanceolate, acute or obtusish leaflets ¾—1 inch long. Flowers pale
yellow or creamy-white ¾ of an inch or more long in dense heads, on
peduncles longer than the leaves; calyx nearly half as long as the
corolla, with long white and short black hairs.

Frequent throughout the Rockies in dry stony and alpine meadows and
slopes, at varying elevations; flowering from June to early July.

[Sidenote: =Aragallus Lamberti= (Pursh) Greene. _Loco Weed._]

Tufted, the branches of the caudex short; scapes few or several, erect,
rather slender, 4—20 inches high. Leaves several, mostly erect, shorter
than the scapes; leaflets 10—15 pairs, mostly oblong-lanceolate, from
sparsely soft-pubescent to lightly canescent, acute, ½—1 inch long.
Flowers pale yellow, ½ an inch long and twice as long as the calyx, in
a loose head, 2—4 inches long.

Abundant in the open ground on the eastern slopes of the Rockies; a
strikingly handsome vetch frequently found in masses of considerable
extent, especially in the region around Banff; flowering in June and
early July.

[Sidenote: =Aragallus splendens= (Dougl.) Greene. _Showy Oxytrope._]

Densely silky, silvery-villous, acaulescent, and tufted. Leaves 4—9
inches long, erect; leaflets very numerous, in verticels of 3—6, oblong
or oblong-lanceolate, acute or acutish at the apex, rounded at the
base, ½ to nearly an inch long. Flowers deep purple, about ½ an inch
long in dense spikes on peduncles exceeding the leaves.

A very showy plant frequently flowering in considerable masses in
the open grounds on the eastern slopes of the Rockies and dry alpine
meadows; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Aragallus viscidulus= Rydb. _Sticky Oxytrope._]

Tufted, with parts of the old leaves remaining. Leaves all basal, 4—6
inches long with 8—15 pairs of leaflets, loosely villous-pubescent,
oblong, obtuse or acutish, ¼ to nearly ½ an inch long, glandular on
the margins. Flowers nearly ½ an inch long varying from pink to dark
purple, in loose spikes on glandular sticky scapes, much longer than
the leaves; calyx more than half as long as the corolla with white
and shorter black hairs; calyx teeth and bracts of the inflorescence
densely glandular.

In dry open ground and alpine meadows through the Rockies at the lower
altitudes, flowering in early June and forming dense tufted masses of
brilliant pink, blue, or purple flowers; probably the most striking
species in the vicinity of Banff.

[Sidenote: =Aragallus deflexus= (Pall.) Heller. _Drooping-fruited
Oxytrope._]

Loosely soft-pubescent or silky, decumbent or ascending 10—18 inches
high. Leaves 4—6 inches long with 12—16 pairs of lanceolate to oblong,
acute leaflets, ¼—½ an inch long. Flowers small, pale purple, little
more than ¼ of an inch long in slender spikes 2—4 inches long on
peduncles much surpassing the leaves. Calyx nearly as long as the
corolla, with short black and longer white hairs; fruit strongly
reflexed.

In moist open ground throughout the eastern Rockies at the lower
altitudes; flowering in July.

[Illustration: Aragallus viscidulus Rydb. (⅓ Nat.) Sticky Oxytrope.]

[Illustration: Aragallus deflexus (Pall.) Heller. (½ Nat.) Drooping
Vetch.]

[Sidenote: =Aragallus inflatus= (Hook) A. Nelson. _Inflated Oxytrope._]

Acaulescent or more or less so, 1—4 inches high, soft-hairy. Leaves
pinnate with 5—11 pairs of short linear-lanceolate or oblong leaflets.
Flowers violet-purple, 1 or 2 on the peduncles which scarcely exceed
the leaves; calyx densely dark-hairy; pods much inflated.

On high alpine slopes and summits through the Rockies, not a common
plant but probably more general than is now known; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Hedysarum americanum= (Michx.) Britton. _Purple Hedysarum._]

Stem erect or somewhat decumbent, smooth or nearly so, 6 inches to 2½
feet high, generally simple. Leaves 2—8 inches long with 11—21 oblong
or oblanceolate-obtuse leaflets, ½ to nearly 1 inch long. Flowers
violet-purple or nearly white, deflexed, ½—¾ of an inch long in rather
loose elongated racemes; calyx teeth ovate-acute, shorter than the tube.

One of the taller of the vetches growing in open stony places and
slides throughout the Rockies at the lower altitudes, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Hedysarum sulphurescens= Rydb. _Yellow Hedysarum._]

Erect, 12—15 inches high, minutely hairy. Leaves with 5—6 pairs of
oblong-elliptic, obtuse-cuspidate leaflets, ½—¾ of an inch long, finely
hairy beneath. Flowers bright yellow, over ½ an inch long; 15—30 in a
rather dense raceme; wings exceeding the vexillum but shorter than the
keel.

Throughout the Rockies in open woods and meadows up to 8000 feet
elevation; flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Hedysarum Mackenzii= Richards. _Mackenzie’s Hedysarum._]

Stems erect or decumbent, 12—18 inches high, usually minutely hairy.
Leaves 3—6 inches long with 11—19 oblong-elliptic leaflets about ½ an
inch long. Flowers ¾ of an inch long, reddish-purple, 20—30 in loose
racemes on peduncles longer than the leaves; calyx teeth very slender,
longer than the tube.

On slides and in loose stony soil throughout the Rockies at varying
altitudes; flowering during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Vicia Cracca= L. _Cow Vetch._]

Finely hairy or sometimes nearly smooth; stems tufted, slender, and
weak, climbing or trailing 2—4 feet long. Leaves tendril-bearing 2—3
inches long of 18—24 thin, linear or linear-oblong, obtuse or acutish,
mucronate leaflets, ⅓—¾ of an inch long. Flowers deep bluish-purple,
½ an inch long or less in dense spike-like racemes 1—4 inches long on
peduncles equalling or exceeding the leaves.

In dry or moist soil throughout the Rockies at the lower elevations,
flowering during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Vicia americana= Muhl. _American Vetch._]

Smooth or some with appressed hairs, trailing or climbing 2—3 feet
long. Leaves nearly sessile, 2—3 inches long, tendril-bearing, with
8—14 elliptic, ovate or oblong leaflets, ½—1½ inches long, obtuse or
sometimes notched or mucronulate at the tip. Flowers bluish-purple
about ¾ of an inch long, 3—9 in loose racemes, on peduncles usually
shorter than the leaves.

In moist ground at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies, climbing
over the surrounding shrubs and herbaceous plants; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Vicia linearis= (Nutt.) Greene. _Narrow-leaved American
Vetch._]

Smooth or nearly so; stems weak, often zigzag, 1—2 feet long. Leaves
tendril-bearing, with 4—7 pairs of narrowly linear or linear-oblong
leaflets, 1—3 inches long, entire, acute and mucronate at the tip.
Flowers purple or purplish, about ¾ of an inch long, 2—6 in loose
racemes, on peduncles shorter than or about equalling the leaves.

In dry soil at low altitudes throughout the Rockies especially near the
line of the railway; flowering during July.

[Illustration: Aragallus Lamberti (Pursh) Greene. (½ Nat.) Loco Weed.]

[Illustration: Lathyrus ochroleucus Hook (½ Nat.) White Vetch.]

[Sidenote: =Lathyrus palustris= L. _Marsh Vetchling._]

Smooth or sparingly hairy, stems angled and winged, slender, 1—3 feet
long; stipules half sagittate, lanceolate-linear or ovate-lanceolate,
½ to nearly an inch long. Leaves with branched tendrils and 2—4 pairs
of lanceolate oblong or linear, acute, mucronate leaflets; 1½—4 inches
long. Flowers purple, half an inch or more long, 2—6 in loose-headed
racemes on peduncles about equaling the leaves.

In wet ground and swamps at the lower altitudes throughout the region;
flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Lathyrus ochroleucus= Hook. _Cream-coloured Vetchling._]

Stems slender, somewhat angled, trailing or climbing, smooth and
slightly glaucous, 2—2½ feet long, stipules broad foliaceous, half
ovate and half cordate, ⅓—1 inch long. Leaves with branched tendrils
and 3—5 pairs of thin, ovate or broadly oval, obtuse leaflets, 1—2
inches long, green above, whitish beneath. Flowers yellowish or
creamy-white ½—¾ of an inch long, 5—10 on peduncles shorter than the
leaves.

On shaded river banks and hillsides at the lower altitudes throughout
the Rockies; flowering during June.




LINACEÆ

_Flax Family_


Herbs with perfect regular nearly symmetrical flowers; sepals 5,
persistent; petals 5 and alternate with the sepals; stamens 5 opposite
the sepals.

[Sidenote: =Linum Lewisii= Pursh. _Lewis’s Wild Flax._]

Perennial from a woody root, 1—2 feet high, densely tufted, smooth,
glaucous. Leaves crowded, oblong or linear, ¼—1½ inches long, acute or
acutish, 3—5 nerved. Flowers bright blue, 1—1½ inches broad; petals 5,
soon falling; sepals 5, oval, mainly obtuse, ⅓ or ¼ the length of the
petals; stigmas shorter than the styles; stamens 5, longer than the
styles.

In open, dry, stony ground and slopes throughout the Rockies; flowering
in June and July.

[Illustration: Empetrum nigrum L. (Nat.) Black Crowberry.]

[Illustration: Linum Lewisii Pursh. (¼ Nat.) Wild Blue-Flax.]




EMPETRACEÆ

_Crowberry Family_


Low evergreen shrubs with narrow nearly sessile leaves jointed to short
pulvini, channelled on the lower side by the revolute margins and small
monœcious, diœcious or rarely polygamous flowers; sepals, petals, and
stamens each 3, fruit a black, berry-like drupe.

[Sidenote: =Empetrum nigrum= L. _Black Crowberry._]

Smooth or the young shoots hairy, usually much branched, the branches
diffusely spreading, 2—10 inches long. Leaves crowded, dark green,
linear-oblong, thick and obtuse, about ¼ of an inch long with strongly
revolute, roughish margins. Flowers very small, purplish; stamens
exserted; berry nearly ¼ of an inch in diameter, black.

Frequent throughout the Rockies in damp woods, especially those of the
“Jack Pine” where it frequently forms a considerable part of the forest
floor, in dense, close mats.




CELASTRACEÆ

_Staff-Tree Family_


Shrubs with simple evergreen leaves, and regular perfect flowers,
sepals, petals, and stamens each 4 in our species.

[Sidenote: =Pachystima myrsinites= (Pursh) Raf. _Mountain Lover._]

Low evergreen shrub, densely branched or nearly simple, 1—3 feet high.
Leaves opposite, smooth, ovate to oblong or lanceolate, cuneate at
the base, the upper half serrate or serrulate ½—1 inch long on very
short petioles. Flowers small in axillary cymes; petals 4, stamens 4,
inserted at the edge of the broad disc.

In gravelly and stony situations extending from the Valley of the
Columbia River at Beavermouth, westward throughout the Selkirks, the
minute blossoms appearing in the latter part of May; a pretty but very
variable shrub in habit and leaf form.

[Illustration: Pachystima myrsinites (Pursh) Raf. (½ Nat.) Mountain
Lover.]

[Illustration: Viola adunca longipes (Nutt.) Rydb. (⅔ Nat.) Dog
Violet.]




ACERACEÆ

_Maple Family_


Trees or shrubs with watery often saccharine sap, opposite, simple and
palmately lobed leaves and axillary or terminal, cymose or racemose,
regular, polygamous or diœcious flowers; fruit of 2 long-winged
samaras, joined at the base.

[Sidenote: =Acer glabrum= Torr. _Smooth Maple._]

A shrub or small tree 6—30 feet high, 2—8 inches in diameter, smooth
throughout except the scales which are densely soft, hairy inside.
Leaves round-cordate with shallow sinus, 2—4 inches broad and nearly
as long, more or less deeply 3-lobed or parted, the ovate-acuminate
lobes doubly serrate with slender teeth; conspicuously veined. Flowers
greenish-yellow, somewhat corymbose on short 2-leaved branchlets
appearing after the leaves. Fruit smooth with slightly spreading wings
about an inch long.

One of the few deciduous trees of the region, growing on slopes with
the other forest trees and in the moist valleys.




HYPERICACEÆ

_St. John’s-Wort Family_


Herbs in our species with opposite, black-dotted leaves, and cymose
yellow flowers; sepals and petals 5, twisted in the bud; stamens many.

[Sidenote: =Hypericum Scouleri= Hook. _Scouler’s St. John’s-wort._]

Simple or sparingly branched above often with numerous small branchlets
from running rootstocks, 1—2 feet high. Leaves thin, shorter than the
internodes, about an inch long, mostly obtuse, more or less clasping
and usually black-dotted along the margin. Flowers bright orange, ½—1
inch in diameter in more or less panicled cymes, sepals oval or oblong,
much shorter than the petals, stamens numerous in three fascicles.

In moist gravelly soil in the Selkirks at Glacier; flowering in July.




VIOLACEÆ

_Violet Family_


Herbs in our species with basal or alternate simple leaves and solitary
or clustered perfect irregular flowers; sepals 5, petals 5, the lower
one larger or with a posterior spur.

[Sidenote: =Viola cognata= Greene. _Early Blue Violet._]

Acaulescent; rootstock short and thick. Leaves long-petioled, smooth or
more or less hairy, slightly fleshy, cordate with a broad sinus, acute
or acuminate, crenately toothed. Flowers large, blue or violet, scapes
2—10 inches long, equalling or surpassing the leaves; petals narrow,
½—¾ of an inch long, all villous at the base, the 3 lower strongly so.

In moist shaded ground, on stream banks and in marshes, frequent
throughout the Rockies; flowering in May and early June.

[Sidenote: =Viola palustris= L. _Marsh Violet._]

Acaulescent, smooth, petioles and scapes arising from a very slender,
creeping or horizontal rootstock, the scapes mostly exceeding the
leaves. Leaves thin, cordate, broadly ovate, orbicular or reniform,
1—2½ inches wide, crenulate. Flowers pale lilac or nearly white with
darker veins; petals broad, ⅓—½ an inch long, spur short.

In marshy places among moss in the Selkirks near Glacier; flowering in
June; not a common species in the region.

[Sidenote: =Viola sempervirens= Greene. _Low Yellow Violet._]

Sparingly hairy, stems weak and decumbent, multiplying by long slender
rootstocks. Leaves mostly basal, rounded, cordate, reniform or
sometimes ovate ½—1½ inches broad, finely crenate; peduncles mostly
exceeding the leaves. Flowers yellow; petals oblong, ⅓ of an inch or
more long, sparingly veined with brown toward the base; spur short and
sac-like.

In open woods throughout the region at elevations ranging from 5000
to 7000 feet, blossoming very early in May or June shortly after the
melting of the snow.

[Sidenote: =Viola glabella= Nutt. _Tall Yellow Violet._]

Minutely hairy or smooth, stems fleshy from a short fleshy horizontal
rhizome, naked or sparingly leafy below, 5—12 inches high. Basal leaves
on long petioles, the upper short-petioled reniform-cordate to cordate,
acute, crenate-toothed, 1—4 inches broad. Flowers bright yellow on
peduncles mainly shorter than the leaves; petals broadly oblong, ⅓—½ an
inch or more long, the lateral and lower with brown lines at the base.

A striking plant on shaded banks and borders of streams and rills at
the higher altitudes, very abundant in the Selkirks; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Viola canadensis= L. _Canada Violet._]

Smooth or nearly so; stems 3—14 inches high, tufted, leafy throughout.
Leaves broadly ovate or nearly orbicular, cordate, acuminate or acute,
1—2½ inches long, serrate, the veins on the lower surface often hairy.
Flowers on peduncles mainly shorter than the leaves, pale violet or
nearly white, veined with purple, and often tinged with purple on the
outside, ½—¾ of an inch broad; petals nearly in the same plane.

In rich moist woods throughout the Rockies and occasionally in the open
alpine meadows, continuing in flower from June until September.

[Sidenote: =Viola adunca longipes= (Nutt.) Rydb. _Dog Violet._]

Slightly hairy or nearly smooth, branching from the base, usually 3—11
inches high, at length sending out runners that bear cleistogamic
flowers. Leaves ovate, more or less cordate at the base, ½—1½ inches
long, obscurely crenate. Flowers on peduncles usually longer than the
leaves, violet-purple to white; petals ½ an inch or more long; spur ¼
of an inch long, rather slender and curved.

A low-stemmed violet usually with brilliant blue flowers, growing in
dry, sandy, shaded or open ground at varying elevations throughout the
Rockies: flowering in June and July.

[Illustration: Elæagnus argentea Pursh. (⅔ Nat.) Silver-Berry.]

[Illustration: Lepargyræa canadensis (L.) Greene. (½ Nat.)
Buffalo-Berry.]




ELÆAGNACEÆ

_Oleaster Family_


Shrubs or trees mostly silvery-scaly or stellate-pubescent with entire
leaves and flowers clustered in the axils or at the nodes of twigs of
the preceding season; fruit drupe-like.

    Stamens as many as the perianth parts; flowers perfect
     or polygamous: leaves alternate.                        =Elæagnus.=
    Stamens twice as many as the perianth parts; flowers
     diœcious; leaves opposite.                            =Lepargyræa.=

[Sidenote: =Elæagnus argentea= Pursh. _Silver-Berry._]

A stoloniferous much branched shrub sometimes 12 feet high, the young
twigs covered with brown scurf, becoming silvery. Leaves oblong-ovate
or ovate-lanceolate, densely silvery-scurfy on both sides, acute or
obtuse short petioled, 1—4 inches long. Flowers usually numerous in
the axils of the leaves, fragrant, silvery, ½ an inch or more long;
perianth silvery without, yellowish within, the lobes ovate and short.

On the eastern slope of the Rockies, on the banks of the rivers and
streams, very abundant at Banff on the Bow and Spray rivers; flowering
in June.

[Sidenote: =Lepargyræa canadensis= (L.) Greene. _Canadian
Buffalo-Berry._]

A shrub 4—8 feet high, with brown-scurfy young shoots. Leaves with
short petioles, ovate or oval, obtuse at the apex, rounded or some
of them narrowed at the base, 1—1½ inches long, green and sparingly
scurfy, stellate above, densely silvery, stellate, scurfy beneath, some
of the scurf usually brown. Flowers small, yellowish, in short spikes
at the nodes of the twigs, expanding with or before the leaves; fruit
showy ¼ of an inch in diameter, translucent, varying in colour on
different plants from orange to brilliant crimson.

Thickets and wooded banks throughout the Rockies; flowering in May or
early June.




ONAGRACEÆ

_Evening Primrose Family_


Herbs, with alternate or opposite leaves and perfect flowers; calyx
tube adnate to the ovary, 2—6 lobed; petals white, yellow, pink, or
purple, folded on each other in the bud; stamens usually as many or
twice as many as the petals.

    Parts of the flower in 4’s; seeds with tufts of hair on the ends.
       Calyx tube not prolonged beyond the ovary; flowers large.
                                                          =Chamænerion.=
       Calyx tube prolonged beyond the ovary; flowers usually small.
                                                            =Epilobium.=
    Parts of the flowers in 2’s; fruit with hooked hairs.      =Circæa.=

[Sidenote: =Chamænerion angustifolium= (L.) Scop. _Great Willow-herb,
Fire-weed._]

Erect, stout, simple or branched, usually smooth, 2—8 feet high.
Leaves numerous, alternate, very short petioled, lanceolate, entire or
denticulate, 2—6 inches long, ¼—1 inch wide, pale beneath, thin, acute
at the apex, the lateral veins confluent in marginal loops. Flowers
¾—1½ inches broad, reddish-purple, in elongated terminal spike-like
racemes, 1—2 feet or more long.

An abundant plant throughout the entire region on open mountain sides
and banks, especially where visited by fire, flowering throughout the
summer, the air being filled with the white cottony seeds a few weeks
after flowering commences.

[Sidenote: =Chamænerion latifolium= (L.) _Sweet Broad-leaved
Willow-herb._]

Erect, usually branching, very smooth below, 6—18 inches high. Leaves
mostly sessile, 1—2 inches long, ¼—½ an inch wide, denticulate or
entire, lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, acutish at both ends, thick,
those of the branches opposite, the veins inconspicuous. Flowers
reddish-purple, 1—2 inches broad, mainly in short leafy-bracted
racemes; petals entire; stigma 4-lobed.

On gravelly river bars and moist clayey banks throughout the entire
region; flowering during July.

[Illustration: _a_ Epilobium luteum Pursh. Yellow Willow-herb. (⅗ Nat.)

_b_ Chamænerion latifolium (L.) Sweet. Broad-Leaved Willow-herb.]

[Sidenote: =Epilobium luteum= Pursh. _Yellow Willow-herb._]

Stems rather stout, 1—2 feet high, usually simple, nearly smooth.
Leaves 1—3 inches long, ovate or elliptical to broadly lanceolate,
acute or acuminate, sinuate-toothed, sessile, or when large, obliquely
tapering to a winged petiole, slightly fleshy. Inflorescence with more
or less glandular pubescence; flowers about ¾ of an inch long, not
opening widely, pale yellow, rather few, at first nodding in the axils
of the upper leaves; style usually exserted and deeply 4-parted.

A rather rare plant in springy places and along alpine brooks, confined
to the Selkirks: flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Epilobium alpinum= L. _Alpine Willow-herb._]

Slender, smooth or nearly so, 3—12 inches high. Leaves pale, petioled,
opposite or the upper alternate, obtuse or obtusish at the apex, ½—¾ of
an inch long. Flowers, few, white, nearly erect, ¼ of an inch or more
broad; stigma nearly entire; capsules slender stalked, 1—2 inches long,
seeds beaked.

In damp and springy places at the higher altitudes throughout the
region; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Epilobium anagallidifolium= Lam. _Nodding Willow-herb._]

Low, usually tufted, 2—6 inches high, slender, smooth or nearly so;
stems commonly hairy in lines and nodding at the apex. Leaves oblong
or narrowly ovate, entire or nearly so, obtuse at the apex, narrowed
at the base into a short petiole ½—1 inch long. Flowers few, axillary,
clustered at the apex, pink-purple, nodding, about ¼ of an inch broad;
stigma entire.

On damp stones and along alpine brooks at high elevations throughout
the region; flowering during midsummer.

[Illustration: Berberis aquifolium Pursh. (¼ Nat.) Trailing Mahonia.]

[Illustration: Chamænerion angustifolium (L.) Scop. (½ Nat.)
Fire-Weed.]

[Sidenote: =Epilobium Hornemanni= Reichb. _Hornemann’s Willow-herb._]

Erect, 6—12 inches high, simple or nearly so, slightly hairy above,
otherwise smooth. Leaves short-petioled, ovate or elliptic, mostly,
broadly obtuse at the apex, narrow or rounded at the base, entire or
rather remotely denticulate, thin, ½—1¼ inches long. Flowers few in the
upper axils, pink-purple or violet, ¼ of an inch or more broad; stigma
entire.

A frequent and very variable species throughout the region at the
higher elevations, along alpine brooks or in damp, partly shaded or
springy spots; flowering during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Circæa alpina= L. _Smaller Enchanter’s Nightshade._]

Mostly smooth or slightly hairy above, 3—8 inches high. Leaves acute
or acuminate at the apex, more or less cordate at the base, coarsely
dentate, 1—2 inches long. Flowers about ⅛ of an inch broad, white, on
pedicels nearly ¼ of an inch long, subtended by minute, slender bracts,
in a slender raceme; fruit nearly obovoid, about ⅛ of an inch long,
covered with weak hooked hairs.

In moist shaded situations and beside alpine brooks, through the
Selkirks; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Circæa pacifica=. Achers and Magnus. _Western Enchanter’s
Nightshade._]

Mostly smooth, stems usually simple, 6—12 inches high, from a small
tuber. Leaves ovate, rounded or cordate at the base, acute or
acuminate, repandly dentate, 1—3 inches long, the slender petiole about
the same length. Flowers white, very small in slender racemes, without
bracts; fruit about ⅛ of an inch long loosely covered with soft curved
hairs.

Growing oftentimes with the other species in moist shaded situations
through the Selkirks; flowering in July.




ARALIACEÆ

_Ginseng Family_


Herbs, shrubs or trees with alternate or verticillate leaves, and
flowers in umbels, heads or panicles; calyx tube adnate to the ovary;
petals usually 5, sometimes cohering together; stamens as many as the
petals and alternate with them; seeds flattened, somewhat 3-angled with
a coloured, fleshy covering.

    Herbs; leaves compound.                 =Aralia.=
    Shrubs; leaves simple.             =Echinopanax.=

[Sidenote: =Aralia nudicaulis= L. _Wild Sarsaparilla._]

Acaulescent or nearly so, rootstock long. Leaf usually solitary,
arising with the peduncle from a very short stem; petiole erect, 6—12
inches long, primary divisions of the leaf slender, stalked, pinnately
3—5 foliate; leaflets sessile or short-stalked, oval or ovate,
acuminate, rounded at the base, finely serrate, 2—5 inches long, often
hairy on the veins beneath. Flowers on a peduncle usually shorter than
the leaves; umbels usually three, nearly round, composed of numerous
small greenish flowers.

In rich woods throughout the region, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Echinopanax horridum= (Smith) Dec. and Planch. _Devil’s
Club._]

Very prickly throughout; stems erect from a decumbent base 4—12 feet
high, leafy at the top. Leaves roundish, cordate, prickly on both
sides, palmately lobed, more or less hairy beneath, 6—24 inches long.
Flowers greenish-white in a dense terminal paniculate umbel; petals
5; stamens 5, alternate with the petals; fruit berry-like, laterally
compressed, bright scarlet when ripe.

An ornamental though very prickly shrub, in moist rich woods throughout
the region, sparingly in the Rockies, west of the divide, but very
abundant in the Selkirks where it frequently forms dense impenetrable
thickets, flowering in early summer.

[Illustration: Echinopanax horridum (Smith) Dec. & Planch. (½ Nat.)
Devil’s Club.]




APIACEÆ

_Celery Family_


Herbs with alternate, compound or simple leaves; flowers small, white,
yellow or purple in compound flat heads; fruit dry, usually of two
flattened carpels.

    Stems 1—2 feet high.
       Leaves pinnately or ternately compound, cut into fine divisions.
          Flowers yellow or white; not purple.               =Lomatium.=
          Flowers purple.                                  =Leptotænia.=
       Leaves simple or 3-lobed; flowers yellow.                =Zizia.=
    Stems 2—3 feet high; leaves ternate.                   =Ligusticum.=
    Stems 4—8 feet high, soft-hairy.
       Leaves ternately divided; flowers white.             =Heracleum.=

[Sidenote: =Lomatium macrocarpum= (Nutt.) C. and R. _Large-seeded
Parsley._]

Nearly stemless, 4—24 inches high, more or less hairy, much branched
at the base from an elongated thick root. Leaves pinnately compound,
segments pinnately-incised, on rather short petioles, purplish at the
base; flowers white or pinkish in a somewhat equally 3—10-rayed umbel;
rays 1—4 inches long.

In dry stony ground throughout the Rockies, very abundant on the lower
ridges in the vicinity of Banff; flowering in early June.

[Sidenote: =Lomatum triternatum= (Pursh). C. and R. _Narrow-leaved
Parsley._]

Purplish at the base, with or without stems, 1—2 feet high, slightly
hairy. Leaves twice or thrice ternate, the leaflets narrowly linear,
2—4 inches long. Flowers small, deep yellow in an unequal umbel of 5—18
rays, with slender bracts.

Through the Rockies on dry ridges and grassy slopes; flowering in early
June.

[Sidenote: =Leptotænia multifida= Nutt. _Cut-leaved Parsley._]

Stems 1—3 feet high, very leafy at the base, from a large fleshy
rootstock. Leaves ternate or thrice pinnate, segments very finely cut.
Flowers small, brownish-purple in nearly equal 8—20 rayed, rounded
umbels, 3—4 inches in diameter, usually without an involucre.

A most striking plant from its beautifully dissected leaves and rather
large heads of rich brownish-purple flowers blossoming in June; on
grassy slopes of Stony Squaw, Banff.

[Sidenote: =Zizia cordata= (Walt.) Koch. _Heart-leaved Alexanders._]

Stout, erect, branched, and smooth or somewhat hairy, 1—2 feet high.
Basal and lower leaves long-petioled, broadly ovate or orbicular,
undivided, deeply cordate at the base, 1—3 inches long, crenate; stem
leaves short-petioled, ternate, the segments ovate or oval, crenate or
lobed. Flowers small, bright yellow, in nearly flat 7—16 rayed umbels,
1—2 inches in diameter.

Common on the eastern slopes and foothills of the Rockies; flowering in
May and early June.

[Sidenote: =Ligusticum apiifolium= (Nutt.) A. Gray. _Wild Parsley._]

Smooth throughout except the slightly hairy inflorescence and rough
leaf margins; stems 2—3 feet high with 1—3 rather small leaves with
inflated petioles. Leaves ternately divided, the segments usually
distinct, ovate, deeply cleft into linear acute, sharply serrate or
entire lobes. Flowers white in nearly flat, many rayed umbels, 2—3
inches in diameter.

Abundant in wet places and along streams through the Selkirks,
especially so in the Asulkan Valley at Glacier; flowering in June and
July.

[Sidenote: =Heracleum lanatum= Michx. _Cow-parsnip._]

Very stout, soft-hairy, 4—8 feet high, the stems rigid, often 2 inches
thick at the base. Leaves petioled, ternately divided, very hairy
beneath, the segments broadly ovate or orbicular, cordate, stalked,
lobed or sharply serrate, rather thin, 3—6 inches broad; petioles much
inflated. Flowers white in 8—30 rayed umbels, 6—12 inches broad, the
rays stout, 2—4 inches long.

Common throughout the region in wet places along streams and river
banks, frequently growing in great masses; flowering in June and July.

[Illustration: Cornus canadensis intermedia Farr. (½ Nat.)
Bunch-Berry.]




CORNACEÆ

_Dogwood Family_


Shrubs or trees with simple, opposite, verticillate or alternate
leaves, usually entire; flowers in cymes, heads, or rarely solitary;
sepals and petals 4 or 5, stamens as many as the petals or more
numerous and inserted with them; fruit a drupe.

[Sidenote: =Cornus canadensis intermedia= Farr. _Dwarf Cornel.
Bunch-berry._]

Smooth, herbaceous from a nearly horizontal rootstock, woody only
at the base; flowering stems, erect, scaly, 5—7 inches high. Leaves
verticillate at the summit of the stem or sometimes 1 or 2 pairs
of opposite ones below, sessile, oval, ovate or obovate, smooth or
minutely appressed, pubescent, acute at each end or sometimes rounded
at the base, entire, 1—3 inches long. Flowers small, capitate, purple,
surrounded by a white involucre of 4—6 petaloid-ovate bracts, ⅓—¾ of
an inch long; stamens alternate with the petals; styles exserted, deep
purple; fruit globose, ⅓ of an inch in diameter in a close head; bright
red.

Common throughout the region in moist woods flowering in early summer.

[Sidenote: =Cornus stolonifera= Michx. _Red-stemmed Dogwood._]

Shrub 3—16 feet high, usually stoloniferous, the twigs smooth
and bright reddish-purple or the youngest finely hairy. Leaves
slender-petioled, ovate, ovate-lanceolate or oval, acute or short
acuminate, rounded or narrowed at the base, finely close-hairy above,
white or whitish and sparingly hairy beneath or sometimes smooth on
both surfaces, 1—5 inches long. Flowers in flat-topped cymes, 1—2
inches broad, petals white, less than ¼ of an inch long; berries white
or whitish.

In moist places and along streams and river banks throughout the
region; an attractive shrub, sometimes forming thickets of considerable
size, the red stems contrasting beautifully with the dark green leaves;
flowering in June.




PYROLACEÆ

_Wintergreen Family_


Low, mostly evergreen perennials with branched rootstocks and petioled
leaves; flowers nearly regular, white or pink; calyx 4—5-lobed;
corolla deeply 4—5-parted or of 5 petals; stamens twice as many as the
divisions of the corolla, anthers opening by pores or short slits;
stigma 5-lobed.

    Flowers racemose; leaves basal.                            =Pyrola.=
    Flowers solitary or corymbose; leaves opposite or whorled.
      Stem leafy at base; flower solitary; style long.        =Moneses.=
      Stem horizontal; branches erect, leafy; style short. =Chimaphila.=

[Sidenote: =Pyrola chlorantha= Sw. _Greenish-flowered Wintergreen._]

Stems 4—10 inches high, 3—10 flowered. Leaves all basal, small,
orbicular or broadly oval, mostly obtuse at both ends, sometimes
narrowed at the base, thick, leathery, dull, obscurely crenulate or
entire, ½—1 inch long, shorter than or equalling the petioles. Flowers
greenish-white, nodding, slightly odorous, about half an inch broad;
stamens and style declined, ascending; anther sacs short-beaked.

On dry wooded slopes throughout the Rockies; flowering during June.

[Sidenote: =Pyrola uliginosa= Torr. _Bog Wintergreen._]

Scape 6—12 inches high, 7—15-flowered. Leaves broadly oval or
orbicular, dull, rather thick, obscurely crenulate, obtuse at both
ends. Flowers frequently over half an inch broad; calyx lobes oblong
or ovate-lanceolate, ¼—⅓ the length of the petals; style and stamens
declined; anther sacs beaked.

In bogs throughout the Rockies, a very pretty species with bright rosy
flowers and rounded leaves; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Pyrola asarifolia= Michx. _Liver-leaf Wintergreen._]

Stem 6—15 inches high, 7—15-flowered. Leaves reniform, usually wider
than long, thick, shining above, obtuse at the apex, cordate at the
base, crenulate, 1—1½ inches long, usually shorter than the narrowly
margined petioles. Flowers ½—¾ of an inch broad, pink, nodding in a
slender raceme 2—4 inches long; stamens and style declined, ascending;
style exserted.

In damp ground, in woods and swamps throughout the Rockies; flowering
in July.

[Illustration: _a_ Pyrola asarifolia Michx. Liver-Leaf Wintergreen.

_b_ Pyrola uliginosa Torr.

_c_ Moneses uniflora (L.) A. Gray. One-Flowered Wintergreen. (⅔ Nat.)]


[Sidenote: =Pyrola minor= L. _Lesser Wintergreen._]

Leaf blades thin, broadly oval or nearly orbicular, dark green,
crenulate, obtuse but sometimes with a spine-tipped apex, rounded,
slightly narrowed or subcordate at the base ½—1 inch long. Flowers
pinkish, ¼ inch broad, nodding, in a close raceme; style straight
included, stamens not inclined.

In damp mossy places throughout the region at the higher altitudes;
flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Pyrola secunda= L. _One-sided Wintergreen._]

Stems generally several together, from the much branched rootstock,
slender, 4—10 inches high. Leaves ovate or often oval, thin, acute
or rarely obtuse at the apex, rounded or narrowed at the base,
crenulate-serrate, ¾—2 inches long, longer than the petioles. Flowers
greenish-white, ¼ of an inch or more broad, many, at first erect but
soon drooping, in a dense one-sided raceme; style straight, exserted;
stamens not declined.

Common in woods throughout the region at the lower altitudes; flowering
during early July.

[Sidenote: =Moneses uniflora= (L.) A. Gray. _One-flowered Wintergreen._]

Stem bearing 1—3 pairs or whorls of leaves at the base, continued above
into a bracted or naked scape 2—6 inches high. Leaves orbicular or
ovate, obtuse at the apex, narrowed, rounded or sometimes subcordate
at the base, rather thin, ¼—1 inch long, longer than or equalling the
petioles. Flowers white, ½—¾ of an inch broad, nodding at the summit
of the stem; petals spreading; capsule ¼ of an inch in diameter, about
as long as the persistent style and lobed stigma; the stamens in pairs
opposite each petal.

In mossy spots in the woods throughout the region; flowering in early
July.

[Illustration: Chimaphila umbellata (L.) Nutt. (⅔ Nat.) Prince’s Pine.]

[Illustration: Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng. (½ Nat.)
Bear-Berry.]

[Sidenote: =Chimaphila umbellata= (L.) Nutt. _Pipsissewa, Prince’s
Pine._]

Stems extensively creeping, sending up both sterile and flowering
branches 3—12 inches high. Leaves numerous, crowded near the summit of
the stem, spatulate or cuneate-oblanceolate, obtuse or acutish at the
apex, sharply serrate, bright green and shining, 1—2½ inches long, ¼—1
inch wide above the middle. Flowers several in an umbellate head, waxy
white or pink, the form of the region being usually bright, rosy pink,
½ an inch or more broad, petals spreading with the rosy pink anthers
opposite them in pairs; capsule about ¼ of an inch broad surmounted by
the short style.

Locally abundant throughout the region; flowering during July.




ERICACEÆ

_Heath Family_


In our species, shrubs with simple leaves and perfect flowers; calyx
free from the ovary 4—5-parted, mostly persistent; corolla regular,
4—5-toothed, -lobed or -parted; stamens usually as many or twice as
many as the corolla lobes; anthers 2-celled, attached to the filaments
by the back or base, the sacs, often prolonged upwardly into tubes;
ovary 2—5-celled; fruit a capsule, berry or drupe.

    Fruit a berry or drupe.
       Calyx becoming large and fleshy.                    =Gaultheria.=
       Calyx small.
          Leaves thick and leathery; drupe reddish-brown.
                                                       =Arctostaphylos.=
          Leaves membranous, veiny; drupe scarlet.           =Mairania.=
    Fruit a dry capsule.
       Anther cells each with a recurved tip.                =Cassiope.=
       Anther cells not appendaged.
          Corolla with united petals.
             Bracts firm, persistent; no scaly leaf-buds.
                Leaves heath-like; corolla without pouches.
                                                           =Phyllodoce.=
                Leaves lanceolate; corolla with pouches.       =Kalmia.=
             Bracts thin, deciduous; leaf-buds scaly.
                Corolla funnel-form, 5-lobed.             =Azaleastrum.=
                Corolla globose, 4-toothed.                 =Menziesia.=
          Corolla with distinct petals.
             Flowers white, umbelled; leaves evergreen.         =Ledum.=

[Illustration: _a_ Oxycoccus oxycoccus (L.) MacM. Small Cranberry.

_b_ Gaultheria ovatifolia A. Gray. Ovate-Leaved Wintergreen.

_c_ Vitis-idæa vitis-idæa (L.) Britton. Mountain Cranberry. (¾ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Gaultheria ovatifolia= A. Gray. _Ovate-leaved Wintergreen._]

Depressed, trailing, with ascending branches with rusty hairs. Leaves
broadly ovate, ½—1 inch long, serrulate, dark green and shining above,
lighter beneath. Flowers pink or nearly white, campanulate, less than ¼
of an inch long, on short solitary pedicels in the axils of the leaves;
fruit bright scarlet, ⅓ of an inch in diameter.

A rather rare plant in the region but abundant in places on the slopes
of Avalanche Mountain at Glacier.

[Sidenote: =Gaultheria humifusa= (Graham) Rydb. _Low Wintergreen._]

Tufted, creeping or depressed, smooth, the flowering branches 1—5
inches long. Leaves oval or rounded, mostly only ½ an inch long;
pedicels solitary in the axils, very short, 3—5 bracteolate. Flowers
depressed-campanulate, white or pinkish, little surpassing the calyx;
fruit scarlet, ⅓ of an inch in diameter.

Common in alpine meadows throughout the Rockies and Selkirks; flowering
in July.

[Sidenote: =Arctostaphylos Uva-Ursi= (L.) _Spreng. Bear-berry._]

Trailing or spreading on the ground; branches 6—24 inches long, the
twigs soft-hairy. Leaves leathery, evergreen, spatulate, obtuse,
entire, smooth or minutely hairy toward the base, ½—1 inch long, ⅓
as wide, short-petioled. Flowers ¼ of an inch or less long, ovoid,
constricted at the throat, rosy pink or white, few, in short racemes at
the ends of the branches.

In dry sandy or stony soil throughout the Rockies at the lower
elevations; flowering in early June.

[Sidenote: =Mairania alpina= (L.) Desv. _Alpine Bear-berry._]

Tufted or depressed-prostrate, branches 2—5 inches high, the twigs
smooth or nearly so. Leaves thin, obovate, crenulate, conspicuously
reticulate-veined, ½—1 inch long, ⅓ as wide. Flowers few, appearing
before or with the leaves from scaly buds; corolla ¼ of an inch long,
white, ovoid, constricted at the throat; berry bright scarlet.

Growing in moss on the wooded slopes throughout the Rockies, flowering
in May and early June.

[Sidenote: =Cassiope Mertensiana= (Bong.) Don. _White Heath._]

Rather stout with rigid, ascending, woody, much branched stems, a foot
or less high. Leaves ½ an inch long, smooth, not furrowed on the back,
closely crowded in 4-ranks. Flowers pure white, nodding, campanulate,
¼ of an inch long with 5 deeply cut obtuse spreading lobes, on smooth
peduncles half an inch or less long, near the tips of the apparently
4-sided stems; calyx smooth, usually red, making the bell-like flowers
appear red and white.

Throughout the region at the higher elevations, frequently carpeting
the ground; flowering in late June and early July.

[Sidenote: =Phyllodoce glanduliflora= (Hook.) Coville. _White
False-heather._]

Stems rather rigid, much branched, 3—12 inches high. Leaves numerous
and crowded but spreading, linear, oblong, obtuse, ¼—½ an inch long,
thick, leathery with a white line through the centre below and deeply
furrowed above, the margins thick and rough. Flowers ovoid, glandular
throughout, less than ¼ of an inch long, much contracted at the throat,
short-lobed, on glandular pedicels ½—1 inch long at the ends of the
branches.

In alpine meadows and woods at the higher elevations throughout the
region; flowering during June and early July, often in clumps of
considerable size.

[Sidenote: =Phyllodoce intermedia= (Hook.) Rydb. _Pink False-heather._]

Much branched, from a more or less decumbent base, 6—12 inches high.
Leaves linear, ¼—½ an inch long, obtuse, leathery, with thickened
revolute, slightly glandular-toothed margins. Flowers pale pink, ¼ of
an inch long, urn-shaped, slightly contracted at the throat, with 5
spreading lobes; at the ends of the branches on glandular pedicels ½—1
inch long; calyx slightly glandular; corolla smooth; slightly fragrant.

Throughout the region growing in the same situations as the other
heathers, and often associated with them, perhaps a hybrid; flowering
in late June and through July.

[Illustration: _a_ Phyllodoce empetriformis (Smith) Don. Red
False-Heather.

_b_ Phyllodoce glanduliflora (Hook.) Rydb. White False-Heather.

_c_ Cassiope Mertensiana (Bong.) Don.

(¾ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Phyllodoce empetriformis= (Smith) D. Don. _Red
False-heather._]

Much branched from the base, 6—12 inches high. Leaves linear, obtuse,
¼—½ an inch long, with strongly revolute, thick rough margins. Flowers
¼ of an inch long, bright rose-colour, campanulate, with broad,
spreading obtuse lobes, very fragrant, on slender, slightly glandular
pedicels ½—1 inch long at the ends of the stems; calyx and corolla
smooth.

Abundant throughout the region at the higher elevations, in the same
situations as the two previous species and flowering with them during
late June and early July.

[Sidenote: =Kalmia microphylla= (Hook.) Heller. _Small-leaved Swamp
Laurel._]

A smooth shrub, 2—6 inches high with erect or ascending branches,
the twigs 2-edged. Leaves opposite, short petioled, less than ½ an
inch long, oblong or ovate, obtuse, narrowed at the base, the margins
revolute. Flowers on slender pedicels 1—1½ inches long, few in simple
umbels terminating the branches; corolla saucer-shaped, bright rosy
pink about ½ an inch in diameter.

Frequent in mossy alpine bogs and meadows throughout the region at the
higher altitudes; flowering during June and early July.

[Sidenote: =Azaleastrum albiflorum= (Hook.) Rydb. _White Rhododendron._]

A shrub with stems 2—6 feet high, with slender hairy branches more or
less glandular when young, nearly smooth with age. Leaves, thin, light
green and shining above, paler beneath, oblong, 1—2 inches long, with
slightly wavy margins. Flowers white, nearly an inch broad, open, with
5-spreading lobes; on short nodding stems in numerous clusters of 1—3
near the ends of the branches, on wood of the previous year; sepals
nearly ½ an inch long and leaf-like, filaments bearded at the base;
stigma peltate, 5-lobed.

On the wooded hillsides at the higher elevations through the Rockies,
but much lower in the Selkirks; flowering in June and July.

[Illustration: Ledum grœnlandicum Œder. (⅔ Nat.) Labrador Tea.]

[Illustration: Azaleastrum albiflorum (Hook.) Rydb. (½ Nat.) White
Rhododendron.]

[Sidenote: =Menziesia ferruginea= Smith. _Smooth Menziesia._]

A shrub 2—6 feet high, twigs more or less chaffy. Leaves obovate,
obtuse and glandular-tipped at the apex, pale, glaucous and smooth or
very nearly so beneath, sparingly hairy above, ¾—1½ inches long, the
margins ciliolate. Flowers 1—5 on glandular pedicels ½—1 inch long in
spreading umbels, becoming erect, corolla ¼ of an inch long, cream
and pink or salmon, urn-shaped, with 4 spreading teeth; stamens 8,
included, with hairy filaments.

Throughout the region in moist woods and slopes; flowering during June.

[Sidenote: =Ledum Grœnlandicum Œder.= _Labrador Tea._]

A shrub 1—4 feet high, with twigs densely rusty woolly. Leaves oblong,
obtuse, 1—2 inches long, ¼—½ an inch wide, green and deeply veined
above, densely brown woolly beneath, the margins strongly revolute.
Flowers numerous, white, nearly ½ an inch broad in close umbels or
corymbs; petals 5, narrow, spreading.

Abundant throughout the region at the lower altitudes in bogs and
swamps; flowering during June.




VACCINIACEÆ

_Huckleberry Family_


Shrubs or small trees with alternate leaves and small perfect flowers;
calyx tube adnate to the ovary, 4—5-lobed or cleft; corolla 4—5-lobed,
rarely divided into single petals, deciduous; stamens twice as many
as the corolla lobes, inserted at the base; filaments mostly short;
anthers attached on the back 2-celled; fruit a globose berry or drupe.

Swamp-Laurel.]

    Erect deciduous shrubs; corolla cylindric or urn-shaped,
     white, pink or greenish.                                =Vaccinium.=
    Low evergreen shrub; corolla open-campanulate, pink;
     berry red.                                             =Vitis-Idæa.=
    Trailing or creeping evergreen shrubs.
       Corolla short-campanulate, white; berry white.        =Chiogenes.=
       Corolla with spreading curved petals, pink; berry red.
                                                             =Oxycoccus.=

[Illustration: Menziesia ferruginea Smith. (½ Nat.) Menziesia.]

[Illustration: Kalmia microphylla (Hook.) Heller. (⅔ Nat.) Dwarf

[Sidenote: =Vaccinium cæspitosum= Michx. _Dwarf Bilberry._]

A shrub 3—7 inches high, much branched and nearly smooth throughout.
Leaves obovate or oblong, cuneate, obtuse or acute, green and shining
on both sides, nearly sessile, serrulate, with close bluntish teeth.
Flowers white or pink, small bell-shaped, ⅛ of an inch long, mostly
solitary in the axils and longer than their drooping pedicels; berry ¼
of an inch or more in diameter, blue with a bloom.

On slopes and in alpine meadows throughout the Rockies at the higher
altitudes; flowers appearing with the leaves in early June.

[Sidenote: =Vaccinium erythrococcum= Rydb. _Alpine Bilberry._]

Stems erect with numerous slender, strict, green branches and
branchlets, 3—18 inches high. Leaves ovate or oval, ½ an inch long or
less, bright green. Flowers ovate, ⅛ of an inch long, white or pink,
5-lobed, solitary in the axils of the leaves; berries small, bright red.

On slopes and in alpine meadows throughout the Rockies at the higher
altitudes; flowering during June.

[Sidenote: =Vaccinium ovalifolium= Smith. _Blueberry._]

A straggling branched shrub, 3—12 feet high, the branches slender,
twigs smooth, joints sharply angled. Leaves oval, short-petioled,
smooth on both sides, green above, pale and glaucous beneath, rounded
at both ends or somewhat narrowed at the base, thin, sometimes spine
tipped, entire or nearly so, 1—2 inches long. Flowers commonly solitary
in the axils on rather recurved pedicels; corolla pink or white, ovoid,
¼ of an inch or more long; berries blue with a bloom ½ an inch in
diameter.

In the beds of snow slides, occasionally in the Rockies, and abundant
through the Selkirks, where it is also found in the woods; flowering in
May.

[Illustration: Vaccinium erythrococcum Rydb. (⅔ Nat.) Alpine Bilberry.]

[Illustration: Vaccinium ovalifolium Smith. Blueberry. (½ Nat.)

Vaccinium globulare Rydb. Thin-Leaved Bilberry.]

[Sidenote: =Vaccinium globulare= Rydb. _Thin-leaved Bilberry._]

A branching shrub 1—3 feet high, nearly smooth throughout, stems
round, only the youngest twigs slightly angled, bark grey and somewhat
shreddy. Leaves broadly oval or obovate, obtuse to acute, somewhat pale
beneath, veiny, sharply and finely serrate, ½—1½ inches long. Flowers
on pedicels ½ an inch long; calyx teeth almost obsolete; corolla
depressed globose, frequently more than ¼ of an inch in diameter,
greenish-white; berry dark purple, ¼ of an inch in diameter.

In beds of snow slides and in woods in the valleys of the Selkirks;
flowering during June.

[Sidenote: =Vitis-idæa Vitis-idæa= (L.) Britton. _Mountain Cranberry._]

A low evergreen shrub with creeping stems, the branches erect, 3—8
inches high, nearly smooth. Leaves thick and leathery, crowded, green
and shining above, paler and black-dotted beneath, ovate or oval,
short-petioled and entire or sparingly serrulate ¼—¾ of an inch long,
the margins revolute. Flowers in short terminal 1-sided racemes or
clusters, nodding, longer than their pedicels; corolla white or pink
nearly ⅛ of an inch long, open-campanulate, 4-lobed; berries dark red,
acid, nearly ½ an inch in diameter.

In bogs and moist mossy places throughout the Rockies; flowering during
June.

[Sidenote: =Chiogenes hispidula= (L.) T and G. _Creeping Snowberry._]

Creeping, branches rough-hairy, slender, 3—12 inches long. Leaves
leathery, persistent, oval, ovate or slightly obovate, acute at the
apex, rounded or narrowed at the base, dark green and smooth above,
sprinkled with stiff, brown hairs beneath and on the revolute, entire
margins; ¼ to nearly ½ an inch long. Flowers white, ovoid, about ⅛ of
an inch long, few, solitary in the axils, nodding, on the lower side
of the creeping stems; berry about ¼ of an inch in diameter, white,
bristly, aromatic.

Throughout the Rockies at the lower elevations, growing in moss and on
damp, decaying logs; flowering in May.

[Sidenote: =Oxycoccus Oxycoccus= (L.) MacM. _Small Cranberry._]

Stems slender, creeping and rooting at the nodes, 6—18 inches long;
branches ascending or erect 1—6 inches high. Leaves thick, evergreen,
ovate, entire, acutish at the apex, rounded or cordate at the base,
dark green above, white beneath, ⅛ of an inch or less long, ½ as wide,
the margins revolute. Flowers 1—6, from terminal scaly buds, nodding on
slender erect pedicels; corolla pink, ⅓ of an inch broad, the petals
curled backwards; stamens and style protruding; berry globose, ¼ of an
inch or more in diameter, acid, often spotted when young.

In sphagnum bogs throughout the Rockies, though not common; flowering
during July.




PRIMULACEÆ

_Primrose Family_


Herbs with perfect regular flowers; calyx free from the ovary, usually
5-parted; corolla 5-cleft; stamens as many as the corolla lobes and
opposite to them; flowers purple, yellow or white.

    Lobes of the corolla erect or spreading.
       Leaves in a rosette at the base of the scape.
          Corolla tube longer than the calyx; flowers pink.   =Primula.=
          Corolla tube shorter than the calyx; flowers white or yellow.
                                                            =Androsace.=
       Leaves whorled at the top of the stem; flowers white.
                                                           =Trientalis.=
    Lobes of the corolla reflexed.                        =Dodecatheon.=

[Sidenote: =Primula americana= Rydb. _Bird’s-eye Primrose._]

Leaves spatulate or oblong, obtuse at the apex, narrowed or somewhat
wedge-shaped at the base, tapering into petioles, green, usually
white-mealy beneath, at least when young; 1—4 inches long, the margins
crenulate-dentate. Flowers umbellate 3—20, on scapes 4—18 inches high;
corolla pink or lilac, usually with a yellowish eye, the tube slightly
longer than the calyx, the lobes wedge-shaped, notched at the apex, ¼
of an inch or more long.

In swamps and wet meadows in the lower valleys of the eastern slopes of
the Rockies not penetrating far into the mountains; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Primula Maccalliana= Wiegand. _Maccalla’s Primrose._]

Similar to the preceding species but much smaller. Leaves spatulate
or obovate, mostly quite broad; pale green above, more or less mealy
beneath, denticulate or repand, obtuse at the apex, narrowed or
cuneate at the base, petioled or sessile, ½—1½ inches long, forming a
rosette at the base of the scape. Flowers ⅜ of an inch broad or less,
umbellate, on a peduncle 1—6 inches high; pale pink or bluish with
a conspicuous orange eye; the lobes obcordate; corolla tube yellow,
slightly longer than the calyx.

The commonest primrose of the region on wet banks and moist, sandy
or gravelly places at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies;
flowering in June, also occurs sparingly in the Selkirks.

[Sidenote: =Androsace carinata= Torr. _Sweet Flowered Androsace._]

Proliferously branched at the base and cæspitose. Leaves folded over
each other, forming rosettes at the bases of the many-flowered scapes;
from lanceolate to oblong-spatulate or ovate, keeled, 1-nerved, ¼—½ an
inch long, acute, fringed with hairs on the margins. Flowers ¼ of an
inch or more broad, cream-coloured with a brilliant yellow eye; 4—10
in a close umbel, on slender hairy scapes 1—3 inches high; flowers
delicately fragrant.

Throughout the Rockies in open situations either dry or moist, and at
low or high altitudes; flowering from early June to midsummer according
to the altitude.

[Illustration: Primula Maccalliana Wiegand. (⅔ Nat.) MacCalla’s
Primrose.]

[Illustration: Androsace carinata Torr. (⅔ Nat.) Sweet Androsace.]

[Sidenote: =Androsace septentrionalis= L. _Alpine Androsace._]

Almost smooth, leaves lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, narrowed at the
base, from irregularly denticulate to laciniate-toothed. Flowers small,
little more than ⅛ of an inch broad, white with yellow centre, in
spreading umbels; peduncles 2—10 inches high.

In open places and on grassy banks at the lower altitudes throughout
the Rockies; flowering in May and early June.

[Sidenote: =Androsace diffusa= Small. _Spreading Androsace._]

More or less hairy. Leaves rosulate, oblanceolate to spatulate or
nearly linear, ½—1½ inches long, obtuse or acute, sharply serrate above
the middle or sparingly toothed. Scapes erect and spreading, often
diffusely branched at the base, 2—4 inches long; pedicels thread-like
from ½—3 inches long in the same umbel. Flowers white or pink, the
corolla included or sometimes equalling the tips of the calyx segments.

On grassy banks and slopes in the Rockies flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Trientalis arctica= Fisch. _Arctic Star-flower._]

Stems slender, 1—4 inches high, with small scattered obovate leaves
below; upper leaves obovate-lanceolate to lanceolate, obtuse, 1—1½
inches long. Flowers white on slender pedicels as long as the leaves;
calyx reddish with 7 narrowly linear acute sepals; petals 7 white,
lanceolate, acute, about twice the length of the sepals; stamens 7.

In moist woods throughout the region, rare in the Rockies but common
throughout the Selkirks; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Dodecatheon pauciflorum= (Durand) Greene. _Slender Shooting
Star._]

Smooth. Leaves dark green, lanceolate, acute, entire, 2—3 inches long.
Flowers few in an umbel; scape 6—8 inches tall; segments of the corolla
rich lilac purple, the undivided part yellow with a narrow scalloped
ring, midway between the base of the segments and the stamen tube;
stamen tube often nearly as long as the anthers, yellow; anthers purple.

In damp, open ground and grassy slopes throughout the eastern Rockies;
flowering in June.

[Illustration: Trientalis arctica Fisch. (⅔ Nat.) Arctic Star-Flower.]

[Illustration: Dodecatheon conjugens Greene. (½ Nat.) Shooting-Star.]

[Sidenote: =Dodecatheon conjugens= Greene. _Shooting-star._]

Plant smooth. Leaves obovoid and elliptic, 2—5 inches long, including
the distinct petiole, obtuse, entire. Flowers large, in a few-flowered
umbel, scape 3—8 inches high; corolla deep purple varying to rose-red;
anthers, distinct, obtuse, the connective lanceolate, acuminate to a
linear point.

In the open ground and plains in the lower Valleys of the Rockies;
flowering in June.




GENTIANACEÆ

_Gentian Family_


Smooth herbs with opposite entire leaves, and regular perfect flowers
in clusters or solitary at the ends of the stems or branches. Calyx
4—12-lobed; corolla 4—12-parted; stamens as many as the lobes of the
corolla and alternate with them.

    Corolla funnel-form or campanulate; without glands,
     spurs or scales.                                       =Gentiana.=
    Corolla campanulate; spurred at the base.         =Tetragonanthus.=

[Sidenote: =Gentiana acuta= Michx. _Northern Gentian._]

Stem leafy, slightly angled, simple or branched, 6—20 inches high.
Basal and lower leaves spatulate or obovate, obtuse, the upper
lanceolate, acuminate, rounded or subcordate at the base, sessile or
somewhat clasping, ½—2 inches long. Flowers numerous in clusters in
the axils of the upper leaves; pedicels ½—1 inch long, leafy bracted
at the base; calyx deeply 5-parted, lobes lanceolate; corolla tubular
campanulate, ½ an inch long, 5-parted, pale blue or greenish; lobes
lanceolate, acute each with a fimbriate crown at the base.

Along stream banks and grassy slopes throughout the Rockies, common;
flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Gentiana propinqua= Richards. _Four-parted Gentian._]

Stems slender, usually much branched from the base and sometimes also
above, slightly wing-angled, 2—7 inches long. Basal leaves spatulate
obtuse, the upper distant, oblong or lanceolate, ½—1 inch long, acute
or obtusish at the apex, rounded at the slightly clasping base,
obscurely 3-nerved. Flowers sometimes numerous, solitary on slender
peduncles, mostly 4-parted, ½—¾ of an inch high, seldom opening;
calyx 4-cleft, two of the lobes oblong, the others linear-lanceolate;
corolla blue or bluish, glandular within at the base, the lobes
ovate-lanceolate, entire or denticulate.

Frequent throughout the Rockies on slopes and open ground beside the
trails; flowering through July.

[Sidenote: =Gentiana prostrata= Haenke. _Dwarf Gentian._]

Stems slender, 1—5 inches long, when prostrate the lateral ones often
creeping. Leaves ovate, rather spreading, bright green with slightly
whitened edges. Flowers solitary, 4-parted, azure blue, ½ an inch high,
the lobes rather spreading.

A very small and rather rare plant found throughout the Rockies at the
higher altitudes, on the alpine slopes and summits; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Gentiana glauca= _Pale-glaucous Gentian._]

Perennial; stems 2—4 inches high. Leaves oval, glaucous, ¼—½ an inch
long, obtuse, the basal forming a rosette. Flowers few or several
at the top of the stem, short-peduncled or nearly sessile, usually
subtended by a pair of bracts; calyx campanulate, the teeth shorter
than the tube; corolla blue or blue-green, ½ an inch or more long, the
tube cylindrical with short ovate obtuse lobes.

In wet alpine meadows and slopes throughout the region, a rather rare
but very striking little gentian, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Gentiana affinis= Griseb. _Large Gentian._]

Stems clustered, 6—12 inches high, mostly ascending. Leaves from oblong
or lanceolate to linear. Flowers from numerous and racemose to few and
almost solitary; calyx lobes linear or linear-awl-shaped, unequal, the
largest rarely equalling the tube; corolla an inch or less long, bright
blue or bluish; funnel-form, spotted inside with white, the lobes
ovate, acute, and spreading.

A showy species in damp open meadows in the lower valleys throughout
the Rockies, especially abundant at Banff; flowering during August.

[Illustration: Gentiana affinis Griseb. (⅔ Nat.) Large Gentian.]

[Illustration: Romanzoffia sitchensis Bong. (⅔ Nat.) Romanzoffia.]

[Sidenote: =Tetragonanthus deflexus= (J. E. Smith) Kuntze. _Spurred
Gentian._]

Annual, stems simple or branched, slender, erect, 6—20 inches high.
Basal leaves obovate or spatulate, obtuse, narrowed into petioles; stem
leaves ovate or lanceolate, acute, sessile, 3—5-nerved, 1—2 inches
long, the uppermost smaller. Flowers ¼ of an inch or more long, few,
on peduncles about their own length, in the axils of the upper leaves;
corolla purplish-green or white, 4—5-parted, the lobes ovate, acute,
each with a hollow deflexed or descending spur about half the length of
the corolla.

In moist places and shaded slopes throughout the Rockies; a rather
frequent but inconspicuous plant owing to its green colour; flowering
in July.




MENYANTHACEÆ

_Buckbean Family_


In our species a smooth marsh herb, with creeping rootstock,
long-petioled, 3-foliate leaves and white or purplish flowers, in
racemes on long lateral scapes.

[Sidenote: =Menyanthes trifoliata= L. _Buckbean._]

Creeping rootstocks sometimes a foot long marked by the scars of
bases of former petioles. Leaves 3-foliate, petioles sheathing at the
base, 2—10 inches long; leaflets oblong or obovate, entire, obtuse
at the apex, narrowed to the sessile base, 1½—3 inches long. Flowers
half an inch long, pure white or purplish in 10—20-flowered racemes
on scape-like naked peduncles; calyx shorter than the corolla which
is bearded with white hairs within, giving the flower a feathery
appearance.

In open marshes throughout the region, local in distribution; flowering
in May and early June.




APOCYNACEÆ

_Dogbane Family_


In our species, perennial herbs with opposite, entire leaves and small,
5-parted, campanulate, pink flowers in corymbed cymes, and slender
elongated terete seed pods.

[Sidenote: =Apocynum androsæmifolium= L. _Spreading Dogbane,
Honeybloom._]

Stems 1—3 feet high, branches broadly spreading, mostly smooth. Leaves
ovate or oval, spine-tipped, smooth above, pale and usually more or
less hairy beneath. 2—4 inches long. Flowers pink, open-campanulate, ⅜
of an inch broad, with 5 spreading lobes, numerous, in loose, terminal
and axillary cymes; seed pods round, slender, curved, 4—6 inches long,
narrowed at the apex, usually in pairs; plant with a milky juice.

Frequent on the line of the railway from Field westward through the
valley of the Kicking Horse River.




HYDROPHYLLACÆ

_Water-Leaf Family_


Herbs, mostly rough-hairy, with alternate or basal leaves, and perfect
regular 5-parted flowers in cymes, spikes or racemes, curled when in
bud and uncoiling as they flower; stamens 5, inserted on the corolla
and alternate with its lobes; filaments thread-like; flowers yellow,
purple or white.

    Plant rough-hairy; leaves lanceolate and simple or
     pinnate; flowers blue or violet-purple.               =Phacelia.=
    Plant smooth; leaves round reniform or cordate;
     flowers white.                                     =Romanzoffia.=

[Illustration: Phacelia sericea (Graham) A. Gray. (⅓ Nat.) Mountain
Phacelia.]

[Illustration: Phacelia heterophylla Pursh. (⅓ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Phacelia heterophylla= Pursh.]

Rough-hairy; stem stout, 6—24 inches high. Leaves white-hairy,
lanceolate to ovate, acute, pinnately and obliquely, striately veined,
the lower tapering into petioles, commonly with 1—2 pairs of small
lateral leaflets. Flowers in a dense spike; corolla bluish, longer than
the oblong-lanceolate or linear calyx lobes; filaments much exserted,
sparingly bearded.

In the Cougar Valley in the Selkirks; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Phacelia sericea= (Graham) A. Gray. _Mountain Phacelia._]

Silky-hairy or canescent throughout, 6—18 inches high, leafy to the
top. Leaves pinnately parted into linear or narrow oblong, numerous,
often pinnatifid divisions, the lower petioled, the upper nearly
sessile. Flowers crowded in an elongated spike, corolla violet, blue or
white, open-campanulate, cleft to the middle; stamens much exserted.

In dry ground and open slopes throughout the region; flowering in June
and July.

[Sidenote: =Romanzoffia sitchensis= Bong. _Romanzoffia._]

Stems slender, weak, 3—6 inches long. Leaves mainly at the root, with
slender petioles, alternate, round-cordate, or reniform, with 7—11
crenate, glandular-tipped lobes. Flowers more or less racemose on
slender, weak scapes with spreading pedicels longer than the flowers;
calyx lobes smooth, much shorter than the delicately veiny pale pink or
usually white funnel-form corolla with yellow throat and broad rounded
lobes.

On constantly dripping ledges of wet rocks, rare in the region
generally but rather frequent about Lake Louise and Lake O’Hara;
flowering during July.




BORAGINACEÆ

_Borage Family_


Herbs with alternate or rarely opposite, entire, leaves and usually
rough hairy stems. Flowers perfect, regular, mostly blue, in 1-sided
curled spikes; corolla 5-lobed, stamens as many as the corolla lobes
and alternate with them; fruit mostly of 4 1-seeded nutlets.

    Nutlets armed with barbed prickles.                     =Lappula.=
    Nutlets not armed with barbed prickles.
       Racemes without bracts; corolla flat, round.        =Myosotis.=
       Racemes with bracts; corolla funnel-form.       =Lithospermum.=

[Sidenote: =Lappula floribunda= (Lehm.) Greene. _False Forget-me-not._]

Rough hairy, stem stout, paniculately branched, 2—5 feet high,
the branches nearly erect. Leaves oblong, oblong-lanceolate or
linear-lanceolate, 2—4 inches long, sessile, obtuse or acute at the
apex, the lower narrowed into long petioles. Flowers 5-lobed, bright
blue with a yellow centre ⅛ to nearly ⅓ of an inch broad in numerous
erect, dense racemes, nutlets ⅙ of an inch long, keeled tuberculate on
the back, the margins armed with a single row of flat barbed prickles,
on pedicels less than their own length.

In moist, open ground, frequent throughout the Rockies; a striking
plant with heads of bright blue flowers, resembling large
forget-me-nots flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Lappula diffusa= (Lehm.) Greene. _False Forget-me-not._]

Similar to the preceding species, but not so tall and with broader
acute leaves. Flowers larger, ½ an inch broad, not so numerous; and
larger, more densely prickled nutlets, ¼ of an inch long, on pedicels
more than their own length.

Throughout the Rockies, probably more common than the previous species,
in moist, more or less shaded or open ground; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Lappula Lappula= (L.) Karst. _Stickseed._]

Pale, leafy, rough, 1—2 feet high, the branches erect. Leaves linear
and linear-oblong, sessile or the lowest spatulate and narrowed into
petioles ½—1½ inches long, obtuse. Flowers very small, about the
length of the calyx, blue, in one-sided leafy-bracted racemes; nutlets
papillose on the back, armed with 2 rows of slender barbed prickles.

In open or waste ground throughout the region, especially on or near
the railway; flowering throughout the summer.

[Illustration: _a_ Lappula floribunda (Lehm.) Greene. False
Forget-me-not.

_b_ Lithospermum linearifolium Goldie. (⅔ Nat.) Narrow-Leaved
Puccoon.]

[Sidenote: =Myosotis alpestris= Schmidt. _Forget-me-not._]

Stems tufted, erect, 3—9 inches high. Leaves oblong, linear, or
lanceolate, hairy, 1—2 inches long. Flowers in rather dense heads;
corolla flat, bright blue with a yellow centre ¼ of an inch or more
broad, 5-lobed.

Frequent throughout the Rockies in alpine meadows and on grassy slopes;
flowering during June and early July.

[Sidenote: =Lithospermum linearifolium= Goldie. _Narrow-leaved
Puccoon._]

Erect or diffusely branched from the base, 6—12 inches high, minutely
rough-hairy. Leaves all linear, sessile, acute, 1—2 inches long.
Flowers of two kinds, leafy-bracted, at the ends of the branches, the
earlier bright yellow, ½ an inch broad with a tube an inch or more
long, the rounded lobes crenately erose; the later flowers small,
inconspicuous and pale.

Dry sandy soil in the valley of the Bow River at Banff, the showy
flowers in May and early June.




MENTHACEÆ

_Mint Family_


Aromatic herbs mostly with 4-sided stems and simple opposite leaves;
flowers irregular, perfect, clustered, the inflorescence typically
cymose; calyx persistent, 5-toothed or lobed; corolla with a short
or long tube, the limb 4—5-lobed, mostly 2-lipped, but some regular;
stamens borne on the corolla tube, typically 4.

    Calyx with a protuberance on the upper side.
       Corolla 2-lipped, the upper arched, tube long, blue.
                                                          =Scutellaria.=
    Calyx without a protuberance on the upper side.
       Corolla tube longer than the calyx; flower 2-lipped purple.
                                                             =Prunella.=
    Corolla tube not longer than the calyx; flower 2-lipped, pink.
                                                              =Stachys.=
    Corolla tube shorter than the calyx; nearly regular, 4-lobed.
                                                               =Mentha.=

[Sidenote: =Scutellaria galericulata= L. _Marsh Skullcap._]

Perennial by slender stolons, leafy; stem erect, usually branched,
1—2 feet high. Leaves oblong-lanceolate to ovate-oblong, thin, short
petioled or the upper sessile, acute at the apex, dentate with low
teeth or the upper entire, subcordate or rounded at the base, 1—2½
inches long, the uppermost usually much smaller. Flowers an inch long,
bright blue with a slender tube and slightly enlarged throat, solitary
in the axils of the leaves, on peduncles shorter than the calyx.

In swamps and wet places, frequent along the railway from Field west to
Beavermouth.

[Sidenote: =Prunella vulgaris= L. _Heal-all, Self-heal._]

Hairy or nearly smooth; stems slender, creeping or ascending, or erect,
usually simple but sometimes considerably branched, 2 inches to 2 feet
high. Leaves ovate, oblong or oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or subacute at
the apex, usually narrowed at the base, thin, entire or crenate, 1—4
inches long. Flowers in dense terminal spikes ½—1 inch long, becoming
2—4 inches in fruit; corolla violet-purple, or sometimes pink or white,
¼—½ an inch long, twice as long as the purplish-green calyx.

Common throughout the region in moist, open or shaded places at the
lower altitudes, frequently forming clumps of considerable size;
flowering throughout the summer.

[Sidenote: =Stachys palustris= L. _Marsh Woundwort._]

Erect, usually slender, simple or somewhat branched, hairy throughout;
1—4 feet high. Leaves lanceolate, sessile or very short petioled,
acuminate or acute at the apex, wedge-shaped or cordate at the
base, 2—5 inches long, ½—1 inch wide, crenulate or dentate, flowers
clustered, forming an elongated, interrupted spike, or sometimes in the
axils of the upper leaves, 6—10 in a whorl; calyx hairy, its slender
teeth more than ½ the length of the tube; corolla deep pink spotted
with purple, ½—¾ of an inch long, the upper lip erect, hairy, the lower
spreading 3-cleft.

In swamps and wet places throughout the region from Field west to
Beavermouth along the railway; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Mentha canadensis= L. _American Wild Mint._]

Perennial by runners; stem more or less hairy with spreading hairs,
simple or branched, 6 inches to 2½ feet high. Leaves oblong,
ovate-oblong or oblong-lanceolate, slender-stemmed, acute at the apex,
sharply serrate, smooth or sparingly hairy, the larger 2—3 inches long,
½—1 inch wide. Flowers numerous, small, ⅛ of an inch long, white, pink
or pale purple, all in whorls in the axils of the leaves, the calyx
about ⅓ the length of the corolla.

In moist soil and marshy places, frequent along the line of the railway
from Field west to Beavermouth; flowering during July.




SCROPHULARIACEÆ

_Figwort Family_


Herbs with alternate or opposite leaves without stipules and mostly
perfect, complete and irregular flowers; calyx 4—5-toothed, -cleft, or
-divided; corolla 2-lipped or nearly regular and stamens 2, 4, or 5,
nearly equal.

    Stamens 5, the fifth sterile or rudimentary.
       Sterile stamen represented by a gland on the upper
        side of the corolla tube.                           =Collinsia.=
       Sterile stamen nearly as long as the rest.          =Pentstemon.=
    Stamens 2, leaves opposite or whorled.                   =Veronica.=
    Stamens 4.
       Stamens not enclosed in the upper lip.                 =Mimulus.=
       Stamens enclosed in the upper lip.
          Anther cells unequal.
             Upper lip of the corolla much longer than the lower.
                                                           =Castilleja.=
             Upper lip of the corolla scarcely longer and
              much narrower than the inflated lower one.
                                                          =Orthocarpus.=
          Anther cells equal and parallel.
             Galea not prolonged into a beak; throat without teeth.
                                                          =Pedicularis.=
             Galea prolonged into a very slender, recurved beak;
              throat with a tooth on each side.          =Elephantella.=

[Illustration: Collinsia parviflora Dougl. (⅔ Nat.) Small-Flowered
Collinsia.]

[Illustration: Elephantella grœnlandica (Retz.) Rydb. (⅓ Nat.)
Long-Beaked Elephantella.]

[Sidenote: =Collinsia parviflora= Dougl. _Small-flowered Collinsia._]

Stems slightly hairy at length, diffusely branched, very slender, 3—15
inches long. Leaves oblong or lanceolate, mostly obtuse at the apex,
narrowed at the base, ½—1 inch long, entire or sparingly toothed, the
lower opposite, petioled; the floral sessile, opposite or verticillate.
Flowers few, in whorls in the axils of the leaves, on long slender
pedicels; corolla blue or whitish, the throat longer than the limb; the
upper lip erect, 2-cleft, the lower lip 3-lobed, spreading.

An inconspicuous little plant on rocks and in damp places throughout
the region; flowering during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Pentstemon fruticosus= (Pursh.) Greene. _Large Purple
Beard-tongue._]

Decumbent, diffusely spreading, 6—12 inches high, woody at the base.
Leaves ovate, obovate or oblong, ½ an inch or more long, serrulate
or entire, smooth or hairy when young. Flowers in glandular-hairy
terminal racemes; corolla violet, blue or pinkish purple, an inch or
more long, tubular funnel-form, 2-lipped, the upper deeply 2-, the
lower 3-cleft.

Throughout the region in exposed stony places and on slides up to an
elevation of 10,000 feet, frequently growing in patches of considerable
size; flowering in June and early July.

[Sidenote: =Pentstemon confertus= Dougl. _Yellow Beard-tongue._]

Smooth throughout or the inflorescence and calyx sometimes with viscid
hairs; stem a foot or two high. Leaves from oblong or oblong-lanceolate
to somewhat linear, usually quite entire. Flowers in a terminal head of
2—5 dense, many-flowered clusters; corolla with a narrow tube about ½
an inch long, pale yellow; the lower lip conspicuously bearded within.

In moist or dry open ground throughout the Rockies, especially abundant
in the valleys of the Bow and Pipestone in the region about Laggan;
flowering during late June and early July.

[Illustration: Pentstemon confertus Dougl. (⅓ Nat.) Yellow
Beard-Tongue.]

[Illustration: Pentstemon pseudohumilis Rydb. (½ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Pentstemon procerus= Dougl. _Blue Beard-tongue._]

Smooth throughout, stems slender, 2—12 inches high. Leaves lanceolate,
1—2 inches long, those of the middle of the stem largest, usually
entire. Flowers in dense verticillate clusters, in a more or less
elongated head; corolla bright blue with a slender funnel-form tube ½
an inch or more long; the lower lip bearded within.

In open dry or moist ground throughout the Rockies, not common; most
abundant in the valley of the Kicking Horse River at Field; flowering
in June.

[Sidenote: =Pentstemon pseudohumilis= Rydb.]

Smooth; stem 8—12 inches high, simple. Basal leaves broadly spatulate
or elliptic, thin, firm, obtuse, or acute, contracted into a slightly
winged petiole, with entire margins; stem leaves oblanceolate, oblong
or lanceolate, mostly all opposite. Flowers blue or bluish-purple in
a loose panicle, with more or less glandular-hairy branches; calyx
glandular-hairy, ¼ of an inch long, deeply cleft into lanceolate lobes;
corolla slightly hairy, about ¾ of an inch long, funnel-form, slightly
oblique.

In open ground and slopes in the Selkirks; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Veronica americana= Schwein. _American Brooklime._]

Smooth throughout; stems decumbent, rooting at the lower nodes, 6
inches to 2 feet long. Leaves oblong, ovate, or oblong-lanceolate, all
distinctly petioled, sharply serrate with a wedge-shaped or rounded
base, obtuse or acute at the apex, 1—3 inches long, ¼—1 inch broad.
Flowers in racemes on slender peduncles in the axils of the leaves;
corolla blue or nearly white, striped with purple, nearly ¼ of an inch
broad, rotate, with 4 unequal lobes.

In brooks and swampy places in the Selkirks, especially around Glacier;
flowering throughout the summer.

[Sidenote: =Veronica Wormskjoldii= R. and S. _Alpine Speedwell._]

Hairy throughout with brown glandular hairs; stems ascending or erect,
slender, usually simple, 2—12 inches high. Leaves oblong, ovate or
elliptic, sessile, mostly rounded at both ends, crenulate or entire,
½—1 inch long. Flowers light blue, in a short, narrow raceme; corolla,
⅛ of an inch broad, rotate, lobes nearly equal and rounded.

Throughout the region in open woods, and in alpine meadows and slopes
up to 7000 feet elevation; flowering during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Veronica serphyllifolia= L. _Thyme-leaved Speedwell._]

Slightly hairy or smooth; stems slender, decumbent, the branches
ascending or erect, 2—10 inches high. Leaves all opposite and petioled
or the uppermost sessile, oblong, oval or ovate, ¼—½ an inch long,
crenulate, entire. Flowers in short spicate racemes at the ends of the
stems and branches; corolla pale blue or sometimes white, with darker
stripes, nearly ¼ of an inch broad.

In open grassy ground at the lower altitudes throughout the Selkirks,
very abundant and striking in the lawn at Glacier House; flowering
during June.

[Sidenote: =Mimulus Lewisii= Pursh. _Red Monkey-flower._]

Stems viscid-hairy, 2—4 feet high. Leaves from oblong-ovate to
lanceolate, acuminate, denticulate, opposite, 2—4 inches long and ½ as
broad. Flowers on peduncles longer than the leaves; calyx campanulate,
¾ of an inch long, with triangular acute teeth; corolla rose-red
or paler, the tube twice as long as the calyx, throat open, limb
two-lipped; lobes of the upper lip erect or turned backward, obcordate,
the lower lip spreading, the lobes obovate.

In wet ground and along streams through the Selkirks, frequently
growing in such abundance as to practically exclude all other
vegetation; the large showy, rose-purple flowers, each with two bright
yellow patches in the throat.

[Sidenote: =Mimulus cæspitosus= Greene. _Yellow Monkey-flower._]

Smooth, stems flattened, decumbent and rooting at the nodes, the
branches rising 3—6 inches high. Leaves orbicular or ovate, ½—1 inch
long, dentate or denticulate, usually sublyrate, purple beneath.
Flowers axillary on long peduncles; calyx campanulate, ⅓ of an inch
long, mottled with dark purple; corolla bright yellow, ¾—1 inch long,
throat spotted with dark red, lobes of the upper lip erect, ⅓—½ an inch
long, the middle lobe of the lower lip broadly cordate, pendulous.

In wet, gravelly soil around springs and in the beds and banks of
alpine brooks, through the Selkirks, often forming large patches;
flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Mimulus moschatus= Dougl. _Musk Plant._]

Hairy with soft and glandular hairs, musk scented; stems creeping
or ascending, branched, slender, 6—12 inches long. Leaves ovate or
oblong, short petioled, acute or obtuse at the apex, denticulate,
rounded or subcordate at the base, 1—2 inches long, half as broad.
Flowers ¾ of an inch long on axillary peduncles, shorter than the
leaves; corolla funnel-shaped with a spreading limb nearly ½ an inch
broad, bright yellow.

In wet shaded ground at the lower altitudes, throughout the Selkirks;
flowering during June and July.

[Sidenote: =Castilleja purpurascens= Greenm. _Painter’s Brush._]

Perennial more or less purplish throughout, stems erect or nearly
so, 4—12 inches high, usually, several from the same root, smooth or
somewhat hairy below, soft-hairy above. Leaves sessile, clasping,
linear or narrowly lanceolate, ¾—2 inches long, usually attenuate and
acute, entire and undivided or occasionally 3-cleft near the apex,
smooth or the uppermost soft-hairy, 3-nerved. Inflorescence in a close
terminal raceme, later elongated, about 3 inches long, close-hairy;
bracts ovate-lanceolate or oblong-ovate, 1—1¼ inches long, usually
entire or occasionally cleft, from deep purple-red to scarlet and
rarely yellow to tinged with red or pink; calyx ¾—1 inch long, ranging
in color with the bracts; corolla 1—1½ inches long, galea green or
greenish-yellow with scarlet margins and exserted beyond the calyx and
floral bracts.

Frequent in the lower altitudes through the Rockies; very abundant
and striking on the flood-plain of the Kicking Horse River at Field;
flowering during June.

[Sidenote: =Castilleja pallida= Kunth. _White Indian Paint-brush._]

Commonly hairy with weak cobwebby hairs, a foot or less high. Leaves
linear to lanceolate or the upper ovate-lanceolate. Flowers in
dense leafy-bracted spikes; bracts oval or obovate, partly white or
yellowish, cobwebby-hairy, equalling the corolla; calyx 2-cleft, the
lobes oblong or lanceolate, corolla ½—1 inch long; galea not exceeding
the calyx.

In moist open grounds at the higher altitudes throughout the Rockies;
flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Castilleja miniata= Dougl. _Bright Painted Cup._]

A foot or two high, mostly simple and strict, smooth or nearly so.
Leaves lanceolate or linear or the upper ovate-lanceolate acute, entire
or rarely 3-cleft. Flowers in a dense, short, hairy spike; bracts from
lanceolate to oval, mostly bright red or crimson, occasionally pinkish,
rarely whitish, seldom lobed; calyx lobes lanceolate, acutely 2-cleft;
corolla over an inch long; galea exserted, linear, longer than the tube.

In moist alpine meadows throughout the Rockies; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Castilleja lanceifolia= Rydb. _Scarlet Painted Cup._]

Perennial with a long creeping rootstock, not growing in clumps, 1—2
feet high, sparingly close-hairy or nearly smooth, very leafy. Leaves
lanceolate; often acuminate, 1½—2½ inches long, rather firm, 3-veined,
the upper seldom if ever cleft. Flowers in a compact terminal head;
bracts bright scarlet, oblong, obtuse; calyx 1 inch long, crimson or
scarlet with a green base about equally cleft; corolla yellowish-green,
½ an inch longer than the calyx.

In moist open woods throughout the Rockies at the lower altitudes on
the eastern slope; flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Orthocarpus luteus= Nutt. _Yellow Orthocarpus._]

Annual, rough-hairy; stems stout, erect, branched above or simple,
6—18 inches high, densely leafy. Leaves erect or ascending, linear or
lanceolate, entire or sometimes 3-cleft, 1—1½ inches long, sessile,
long acuminate; bracts of the dense spike lanceolate, broader and
shorter than the leaves, entire or 3-cleft, green, mostly longer than
the flowers. Flowers bright yellow, an inch long or less, the upper lip
ovate, obtuse, about as long as the sac-like 3-toothed lower one.

In open ground in the lower valleys throughout the region as far
west as the valley of the Columbia River at Beavermouth; flowering
throughout the summer.

[Sidenote: =Elephantella grœnlandica= (Retz.) Rydb. _Long-beaked
Elephantella._]

Whole plant usually purple, smooth; stem simple, erect, 1—1½ feet
high. Leaves alternate, lanceolate in outline, pinnately parted or the
lower pinnately divided into lanceolate, acute, crenulate, or incised
segments, the upper sessile, the lower slender-petioled 2—6 inches
long. Flowers in a very dense spike 1—6 inches long; calyx short,
acutish; corolla red or purple, the galea produced into a slender
beak ½—¾ of an inch long, which is decurved against the lower lip and
upwardly recurved beyond it; body of the corolla about ¼ of an inch
long.

In open bogs and wet alpine meadows at the higher altitudes throughout
the Rockies; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Pedicularis racemosa= Dougl. _White Lousewort._]

Smooth throughout, simple or sometimes branching, 6—18 inches high.
Leaves lanceolate, undivided, minutely and doubly crenulate, 2—4
inches long. Flowers short-pedicelled in a short leafy raceme or
spike, or the lower remote in the axils of the leaves; corolla white,
showy, the galea which is half an inch long produced into a slender,
elongated, incurved beak nearly reaching the apex of the broad lower
lip.

At the higher altitudes in the Rockies in moist open ground and alpine
meadows, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Pedicularis bracteosa= Benth. _Wood Betony._]

Smooth, 1—3 feet high; leaves 3—10 inches long, all pinnately parted,
the lower divided, ample; divisions of the leaves ½—2 inches long,
linear-lanceolate. Flowers crowded in a cylindrical, leafy-bracted
spike, 2—6 inches long; corolla less than an inch long, pale yellow or
reddish, the galea much longer than the lip with a hooded summit.

Frequent throughout the Rockies in moist open woods and alpine meadows
at the higher elevations; flowering during July.




LENTIBULARIACEÆ

_Butterwort Family_


In our species, stemless herbs with fibrous roots and 1-flowered
scapes; basal, tufted, entire leaves, the upper surface covered with a
viscid secretion, to which insects adhere and are caught by the curling
of the sensitive leaf margins; calyx 4—5-parted or 2-lipped; corolla
sac-like and contracted into a spur.

[Sidenote: =Pinguicula vulgaris= L. _Butterwort._]

Leaves pale yellowish-green, 3—7 in a rosette at the base of the
scape, greasy to the touch on the upper surface, ovate-lanceolate,
obtuse, 1—2 inches long, ¼ as wide. Flowers solitary on a slender
scape, violet-purple, nearly ½ an inch broad when expanded, 2-lipped;
the upper lip 2-lobed; the lower 3-lobed, larger; the tube gradually
contracted into an obtuse or acute nearly straight spur, ⅓ of an inch
long.

In wet mossy places, on rocks, or edges of gravelly stream beds
throughout the Rockies, at the lower altitudes; the bright little
flowers suggesting violets; flowering during June.

[Illustration: _a_ Pinguicula vulgaris L. Butterwort.

_b_ Pentstemon fruticosus (Pursh) Greene. (¾ Nat.) Large Purple
Beard-Tongue.]




RUBIACEÆ

_Madder Family_


In our species, herbs with 4-angled stems and branches, with
verticillate leaves and small 4-parted flowers, regular and perfect and
fruit separating into 2-carpels.

[Sidenote: =Galium boreale= L. _Northern Bed-straw._]

Smooth, erect, simple or branched, leafy, 1—2½ feet high. Leaves in
4’s, lanceolate or linear 3-nerved, obtuse or acute, 1—2½ inches long,
the margins sometimes fringed with hairs. Flowers white, numerous in
a terminal panicle; corolla 4-parted, ⅛ of an inch across, the lobes
lanceolate, acute.

In open ground and in open woods or thickets at the lower altitudes,
throughout the Rockies; flowering in July.




CAPRIFOLIACEÆ

_Honeysuckle Family_


Shrubs, trees, vines or perennial herbs with opposite leaves and mostly
cymose flowers; calyx 3—5-toothed, the corolla 5-lobed or sometimes
2-lipped; stamens 5-inserted on the tube of the corolla and alternate
with the lobes; fruit a berry, drupe or capsule.

    Corolla rotate or urn-shaped; flowers in compound cymes.
       Leaves pinnate.                                       =Sambucus.=
       Leaves simple.                                        =Viburnum.=
    Corolla tubular or campanulate, often 2-lipped.
       Creeping, somewhat woody herb; flowers in pairs, pink.
                                                               =Linnæa.=
    Shrubs, erect or climbing.
       Corolla short-campanulate, regular or nearly so.
                                                       =Symphoricarpos.=
       Corolla tubular and irregular.                        =Lonicera.=

[Sidenote: =Sambucus pubens= Michx. _Red-berried Elder._]

A shrub 2—12 feet high, the twigs and leaves commonly hairy; stems
woody, the younger with reddish-brown pith. Leaves pinnate with 3—7
ovate-lanceolate or oval, acuminate leaflets 2—5 inches long, sharply
serrate. Flowers numerous, less than ¼ of an inch broad, white, in a
close oblong head 3—4 inches high, longer than broad; berries in a
compact head, bright scarlet, ¼ of an inch in diameter.

Rocky places and thickets throughout the region though most abundant in
the Selkirks; flowering in June, the bright red berries ripe in late
summer.

[Sidenote: =Sambucus melanocarpa= A. Gray. _Black-berried Elder._]

A shrub 2—12 feet high, smooth or the young leaves slightly hairy.
Leaves pinnate with 3—7 or rarely 9 ovate-oblong or ovate-lanceolate,
acuminate leaflets, 2—5 inches long, sharply serrate. Flowers small
white in a close compound cyme 3—4 inches high and as broad; berries ¼
of an inch broad, black and shining in a close head.

Rocky places and thickets in the Selkirks; growing with the other
species and difficult to distinguish from it except by the colour of
the berries.

[Sidenote: =Viburnum pauciflorum= Pylaie. _Few-flowered Cranberry
Tree._]

A straggling bush 2—6 feet high with twigs and petioles smooth or
nearly so. Leaves broadly oval, obovate or broader than long; 5-ribbed,
mostly with 3 rather shallow lobes above the middle, coarsely and
unequally dentate, smooth above, more or less hairy on the veins
beneath, 1½—3 inches broad. Flowers small, pure white or pinkish, ¼
of an inch broad in compact axillary heads an inch or so broad; drupe
globose, bright red, acid, about half an inch long.

A most attractive shrub in thickets and woods at the lower altitudes
throughout the Rockies; flowering in May and early June; the acid fruit
is frequently used for preserving.

[Sidenote: =Linnæa americana= Forbes. _Twin-flower._]

Branches slender, woody, slightly hairy, trailing, 6—24 inches long.
Leaves evergreen, opposite, obovate or orbicular, obscurely crenate,
thick, ¼—¾ of an inch wide, sometimes wider than long. Flowers nodding
in pairs, rarely in 4’s, on slender pedicels ¼—¾ of an inch long, very
fragrant; corolla tubular-campanulate with 5 equal lobes, pink or
nearly white, deep pink within.

In moist cool woods, frequent throughout the region, especially in the
Rockies; flowering in late June and early July.

[Illustration: Linnæa americana Forbes. (¼ Nat.) American Twin-Flower.]

[Illustration: Lonicera ebractulata Rydb. (½ Nat.) Fly Honeysuckle.]

[Sidenote: =Symphoricarpos racemosus= Michx. _Snowberry._]

An erect shrub, 1—4 feet high, smooth or nearly so with slender
branches. Leaves oval, obtuse at each end, 1—2 inches long, entire,
undulate or sometimes dentate. Flowers pale pink or white, few, in
axillary clusters; corolla campanulate, ¼ of an inch long, equally
5-lobed, slightly inflated at the base and bearded within; berries
snow-white, nearly ½ an inch in diameter.

On rocky banks and along streams at the lower altitudes throughout the
Rockies; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Symphoricarpos pauciflorus= (Robbins) Britton. _Low
Snowberry._]

A low, spreading, diffusely branched shrub 6—9 inches high. Leaves
broadly oval or orbicular, entire, softly hairy, especially along the
veins beneath. Flowers about ¼ of an inch long, solitary in the upper
axils, and 2 or 3 in the terminal spike; corolla campanulate, 5-lobed,
bearded within; berry globose, white, ¼ of an inch in diameter.

In rocky places and on wooded slopes throughout the Rockies; flowering
in July.

[Sidenote: =Lonicera glaucescens= Rydb. _Douglas’s Honeysuckle._]

Smooth, more or less shrubby or twining. Leaves smooth above, glaucous
and hairy at least on the veins beneath, 1½—2 inches long, papery on
the margins, usually only the upper pair connate-perfoliate. Flowers
in a short terminal interrupted spike, corolla 1 inch long or less,
yellow changing to reddish, slightly hairy without, long-hairy within,
the tube rather strongly inflated at the base, the 2-lipped limb
shorter than the tube, stamens and style exserted.

In rocky places and along river banks throughout the Rockies; flowering
during July.

[Sidenote: =Lonicera ebractulata= Rydb. _Fly Honeysuckle._]

Shrubby, 3—6 feet high with grey bark. Leaves light green, glaucous
and hairy beneath, fringed with hairs on the margins, elliptic-ovate
or broadly ovate, obtuse, rounded or cordate at the base, rounded at
the apex, 1—2½ inches long, ½—1½ inches wide. Flowers in pairs from
the axils of the leaves; peduncles about ½ an inch long; corolla light
yellow, about ¾ of an inch long, funnel-form, and spurred at the base
on the inner side; berry bright red, ¼ of an inch in diameter.

In moist woods throughout the region at the lower altitudes; flowering
in May and early June.

[Sidenote: =Lonicera involucrata= (Richards) Banks. _Involucred Fly
Honeysuckle._]

A nearly smooth shrub 3—10 feet high. Leaves short-petioled, ovate,
oval or obovate, 2—6 inches long, acute or acuminate at the apex,
narrowed or rounded at the base, more or less hairy at least when
young. Flowers greenish-yellow, 2 or 3 on axillary peduncles, 1—2
inches long, bracts foliaceous, ovate or oval, often cordate, bractlets
larger, greenish-yellow, at length turning rich maroon and surrounding
the fruit; corolla hairy, funnel-form; the limb nearly equally 5-lobed;
stamens and styles slightly exserted; berries separate, globose or
oval, nearly black, about ⅓ of an inch in diameter.

In rich moist woods and thickets at the lower altitudes throughout the
region, inconspicuous when in flower in late June and early July, but
especially showy when in fruit, the blue-black berries subtended by the
showy maroon bracts, making it a most striking shrub during summer and
early autumn.

[Illustration: Lonicera involucrata (Richards.) Banks. (⅔ Nat.)
Involucred Fly Honeysuckle.]




VALERIANACEÆ

_Valerian Family_


Perennial strongly smelling herbs, with opposite leaves and paniculate
heads of small pink or white, funnel-form, more or less gibbous
flowers, commonly with 3 exserted stamens.

[Sidenote: =Valeriana septentrionalis= Rydb. _Northern Valerian._]

Erect, perfectly smooth throughout or the inflorescence minutely hairy,
8—16 inches high. Basal, leaves petioled, spatulate or oval, 1—5
inches long, entire; stem leaves usually 3 pairs, the lower petioled,
the upper sessile, segments, 5—7 oval or linear-lanceolate, entire or
merely undulate on the margins. Flowers cymose-paniculate, usually
congested; corolla white, about ¼ of an inch long; fruit smooth, ⅛ of
an inch or slightly longer.

In moist shaded places and on slopes in the lower valleys of the
Rockies; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Valeriana Scouleri= Rydb. _Scouler’s Valerian._]

Smooth throughout; stem rather stout, 1—3 feet high. Leaves, the basal
on long petioles, oblong, 1—2 inches long, 3-lobed, the centre one much
the largest, oblong, tapering to both ends, the lateral lanceolate;
stem leaves, 2—4 pairs pinnately parted in 5—7 lanceolate, acute,
entire, or undulate segments, 1—2 inches long. Flowers pink in a flat,
cymose panicle, 2—2½ inches broad; corolla nearly ¼ of an inch long,
funnel-form; stamens and style exserted.

In moist open ground throughout the Rockies at the higher elevations;
flowering during June and early July.

[Sidenote: =Valeriana sitchensis= Bong. _Wild Heliotrope._]

Smooth; stems rather stout, 1—5 feet high, often branching. Leaves in
2—4 pairs, pinnately 3—5-lobed, leaflets ovate to oblong or lanceolate,
acuminate, coarsely dentate, 1—2 inches long, densely white-hairy
at the base of the petioles; basal leaves lacking at the time of
flowering. Flowers very fragrant, pink, in a compact cymose panicle,
corolla broad, funnel-form, ¼ of an inch long with spreading rounded
lobes; stamens and style much exserted.

Common along the streams and in damp places in the Selkirks, at times
forming vast masses of pink when in flower in June and early July.

[Illustration: Valeriana sitchensis Bong. (⅓ Nat.) Wild Heliotrope.]

[Illustration: Lobelia Kalmii strictiflora Rydb. (Nat.) Brook
Lobelia.]




CAMPANULACEÆ

_Bellflower Family_


Herbs with alternate simple leaves, usually milky juice, and perfect
flowers; calyx mostly 5-lobed; corolla regular or irregular, the tube
entire or deeply cleft on one side, its limb 5-lobed, regular or more
or less 2-lipped; stamens 5, alternate with the corolla lobes.

[Sidenote: =Campanula uniflora= L. _Arctic Harebell._]

Smooth or nearly so, simple, 1—6 inches high. Leaves linear or
linear-oblong, acute, sessile, thickish entire or sparingly dentate,
¾—1½ inches long or the lower and basal ones spatulate, obtuse and
narrowed into petioles. Flowers erect, calyx tube top-shaped, smooth
or hairy, shorter than or equalling the lobes; corolla narrowly
campanulate, ⅓—½ an inch long, bright blue, with 5 slightly spreading
lanceolate lobes.

Alpine summits in the Rockies not common; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Campanula rotundifolia= L. _Harebell, Bluebell._]

Smooth or nearly so, stems erect or spreading, often several from
the same root, simple or branched, 6 inches to 2 feet high. Basal
leaves nearly orbicular or broadly ovate, usually heart-shaped and
slender petioled, ¼—1 inch wide, dentate or entire, often wanting at
flowering time; stem leaves linear or linear-oblong acute, mostly
entire and sessile or the lower narrowed into short petioles and
somewhat spatulate. Flowers several or numerous in racemes, drooping or
spreading, slender pedicelled; calyx lobes hair-like, spreading, longer
than the tube, corolla bright blue, campanulate, ½—1 inch long.

On moist rocks or stony places, on slides or gravelly stream banks,
frequent throughout the region; flowering during most of the summer.

[Sidenote: =Lobelia Kalmii strictiflora= Rydb. _Brook Lobelia._]

Smooth throughout or slightly hairy below; stem simple or slightly
branched, erect, leafy, 4—8 inches high. Leaves basal, small, ¼—½ an
inch long, obovate, hairy; stem leaves linear. Flowers light blue or
white, ⅓ or nearly ½ an inch long on erect pedicels slightly more than
their own length; petals 5, the two upper erect, ⅛ of an inch long,
very slender, the 3 lower broader, ¼ of an inch long and spreading, in
loose racemes, lower bracts linear-lanceolate, the upper hair-like.

On wet banks or wet gravelly or sandy ground at the lower altitudes
throughout the Rockies, abundant locally; flowering in July.




CICHORIACEÆ

_Chicory Family_


Herbs almost always with milky juice, alternate or basal leaves and
yellow or rarely pink, blue, purple, or white flowers in involucrate
heads; bracts of the involucre in 1 to several series; flowers all
alike and perfect; corolla with a short or long tube and a strap-shaped
(ligulate) usually 5-toothed limb (ray).

    Heads solitary; leaves all basal.
       Achenes smooth at the apex.                         =Agoseris.=
       Achenes spinulose at the apex.                     =Taraxacum.=
    Heads several; leaves not all basal.
       Achenes flattened.
          Flowers yellow.                                   =Sonchus.=
          Flowers blue.                                     =Lactuca.=
       Achenes rounded.
          Pappus white.                                      =Crepis.=
          Pappus tawny.                                   =Hieracium.=

[Sidenote: =Agoseris glauca= (Pursh.) Greene. _Large-flowered
Agoseris._]

Pale and smooth throughout or a little woolly below. Leaves
linear-lanceolate or oblong, entire, dentate or pinnatifid, 2—10
inches long, acuminate. Scapes stout, smooth or slightly hairy, longer
than the leaves, 6—18 inches high, head 1—2 inches broad, rays bright
yellow, involucre oblong, campanulate, usually smooth.

Open grounds and on grassy alpine slopes and in meadows; flowering
during June and July.

[Illustration: _a_ Hieracium umbellatum L. Narrow-Leaved Hawk-weed.

_b_ Agoseris aurantiaca (Hook.) Greene. (⅔ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Agoseris aurantiaca= (Hook.) Greene. _Orange-flowered
Agoseris._]

Nearly smooth, not glaucous. Leaves oblanceolate, obtuse, entire or
with lanceolate lobes toward the base, narrowed into slender petioles,
4—8 inches long. Scapes longer than the leaves, smooth below, woolly at
the top; involucre ½—¾ of an inch high, bracts lanceolate, more or less
woolly, flowers orange or copper-coloured.

In open ground and alpine meadows throughout the region; flowering in
midsummer.

[Sidenote: =Agoseris graciliens= (A. Gray) Greene. _Slender Agoseris._]

Smooth, leaves lanceolate or linear-lanceolate entire, 6—8 inches
long, acute. Scapes slender, 10—18 inches high, woolly at the summit;
involucre ½—¾ of an inch long, bracts narrow, smooth with hairy-fringed
margins; flowers deep orange.

In grassy alpine meadows throughout the Rockies at the higher
altitudes; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Taraxacum Taraxacum= (L.) Karst. _Dandelion._]

Root thick and deep. Leaves oblong to spatulate in outline, usually
rough-hairy at least when young, acute or obtuse, pinnatifid,
sinuate-dentate or rarely nearly entire, rather succulent, 3—10
inches long, ½—2½ inches wide, narrowed into petioles. Scapes erect,
2—18 inches high, head 1—2 inches broad, containing very numerous
golden yellow flowers, inner bracts of the involucre, linear or
linear-lanceolate, the outer similar, shorter, not glaucous, reflexed,
acute; achenes greenish brown.

In waste places and open ground throughout the region, along roadsides
and near the railway; established as a weed; flowering in early summer.

[Sidenote: =Taraxacum montanum= Nutt. _Mountain Dandelion._]

Smooth; scapes and leaves from the crown of a thick, vertical root.
Leaves spatulate, oblong, nearly entire or runcinately-toothed, obtuse,
the teeth shallow and simple, 3—4 inches long, ½—¾ of an inch wide.
Flowers bright orange or yellow on smooth scapes, 4—8 inches high;
involucral bracts all appressed, in 2-series, the outer ovate to
lanceolate, frequently reddish; inner ones narrowly lanceolate.

Throughout the Rockies in the lower valleys and slopes; flowering in
early June.

[Sidenote: =Sonchus arvensis= L. _Milk Thistle._]

Stems smooth, leafy below, branched and nearly naked above, 2—4 feet
high. Lower and basal leaves runcinate-pinnatifid, often 12 inches
long, spinulose dentate, narrowed into short petioles, the upper
pinnatifid or entire, clasping. Flowers bright yellow, numerous in
showy heads, 1—2 inches broad; involucre nearly an inch high.

An introduced weed, occurring more or less frequently along the line of
the railway throughout the region; a showy plant when in flower, during
the early part of the day.

[Sidenote: =Lactuca pulchella= (Pursh) DC. _Large-flowered Blue
Lettuce._]

Smooth throughout and somewhat glaucous; stem rather slender and leafy,
1—3 feet high. Leaves linear-lanceolate, lanceolate or oblong, acute,
entire, dentate, lobed or pinnatifid, 2—8 inches long. Flowers bright
blue or violet in numerous heads ½ an inch or more broad, in an open
panicle.

Frequent along the railway in moist open places throughout the region;
flowering in midsummer.

[Sidenote: =Crepis nana= Richards. _Alpine Hawk’s-beard._]

Smooth, forming depressed tufts on slender, creeping rootstocks. Leaves
chiefly at the root, 1—2 inches long including the petioles, obovate
to spatulate, entire, repand dentate or lyrate, commonly equalling the
clustered stems. Heads few-flowered, nearly ½ an inch high, narrowly
cylindric, ⅛ of an inch in diameter; flowers bright yellow, spreading ¼
of an inch across.

A small alpine plant growing among loose stones and on the moraines and
on slides and summits throughout the Rockies; flowering in midsummer.

[Sidenote: =Crepis elegans= Hook. _Many-flowered Hawk’s-beard._]

Smooth, many-stemmed from a perennial tap-root, 6—12 inches high,
diffusely branched. Leaves entire or nearly so; root leaves spatulate;
stem-leaves from lanceolate to linear. Heads numerous, narrowly
cylindric, ¼—⅓ of an inch high, the pale yellow flowers little more
than ⅓ of an inch across.

In gravel beds along the rivers and larger streams throughout the
Rockies; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Hieracium umbellatum= L. _Narrow-leaved Hawk-weed._]

Stem rather slender, smooth or puberulent, sometimes rough hairy
below, leafy, simple, 1—2½ feet high. Leaves lanceolate or the lowest
spatulate, entire, denticulate or sometimes laciniate-dentate, acute or
acuminate, 1—3 inches long, smooth above, usually hairy beneath with
the margins fringed with hairs. Heads of flowers nearly an inch broad,
umbellate, bright yellow.

On banks and near rivers in the Rockies; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Hieracium Scouleri= Hook. _Hairy Hawk-weed._]

Hairy throughout with long, soft hairs; 1—2 feet high. Leaves
lanceolate or spatulate-lanceolate, 3—6 inches long. Flowers in an
irregular branching panicle. Head ½ an inch high; involucre with
copious long bristly hairs; flowers bright yellow, ½ an inch or more
broad.

On banks and stony open ground throughout the region flowering during
July.

[Sidenote: =Hieracium gracile= Hook. _Slender Hawk-weed._]

Growing in tufts, pale green. Leaves nearly all in clusters at the
root, obovate to oblong-spatulate, 1—3 inches long, attenuate into
petioles, entire or repand denticulate. Stems 8—18 inches high,
brownish-hairy above, bearing few or several heads of flowers near the
top; involucres about ⅓ of an inch high, usually blackish-hairy at the
base; flowers bright yellow in heads ¼ of an inch or less broad.

In dry open or shaded places at the higher elevations throughout the
region, growing in sand; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Hieracium albiflorum= Hook. _White-flowered Hawk-weed._]

Loosely branching and hairy with long hairs; 1—3 feet high. Leaves
oblong, thin, 2—6 inches long. Involucres narrow-campanulate, ⅓ to
nearly ½ an inch high; flowers white, ¼ of an inch across or more;
several in a compound cyme.

On sandy banks and open mountain sides, frequent throughout the region
at the lower elevations; flowering during June and July.




CARDUACEÆ

_Thistle Family_


Herbs with watery or resinous sap and alternate, opposite or basal
leaves; flowers perfect, pistillate or neutral; borne on a common
receptacle forming heads, surrounded by an involucre of few to many
bracts in one or more series; calyx tube attached to the top of the
ovary, the limb (pappus) of bristles, awns, teeth, scales, crown-like
or wanting; corolla tubular, usually 5-lobed or -cleft, the marginal
flowers frequently expanded into a ligule (ray); when the ray flowers
are absent the head is said to be discoid, when present, radiate; the
tubular flowers form the disc. The largest of all the families of
flowering plants comprising about 760 genera and not less than 10,000
species, represented in the region by the following:

    Anthers not tailed at the base; heads rayed or rayless.
       Style branches of the perfect flowers flattened, with
        terminal appendages.
          Rays yellow or sometimes wanting.
             Pappus double, the outer very short.          =Chrysopsis.=
             Pappus simple; panicle compact.                 =Solidago.=
          Rays white, purple, or blue, rarely wanting.
             Involucral bracts in 1—2 series, narrow; rays
              usually narrow and numerous.                   =Erigeron.=
             Involucral bracts in 2—5 series; rays broader and
              less numerous.
          Scales of the involucre dry, papery and appressed.
                                                           =Eucephalus.=
          Scales of the involucre more or less herbaceous,
           and spreading.                                       =Aster.=
       Style branches of the perfect flowers straight edged
        or with hairy tips.
          Involucre not scarious.
             Pappus never capillary; receptacle chaffy or bristly.
                Receptacle conic, chaffy; pappus none.      =Rudbeckia.=
                Receptacle flat, chaffy; tall herbs; pappus 2 scales.
                                                           =Helianthus.=
                Receptacle bristly; pappus a crown of scales.
                                                           =Gaillardia.=
             Pappus capillary.
                Leaves all or mostly opposite.                 =Arnica.=
                Leaves alternate.
                   Flowers white or pinkish; leaves large.  =Petasites.=
                   Flowers yellow, leaves small.              =Senecio.=
          Involucre scarious.
             Receptacle chaffy; rays short.                  =Achillea.=
             Receptacle naked; rays conspicuous.        =Chrysanthemum.=
             Receptacle naked; rays none.                   =Artemisia.=
    Anthers with tails at the base; heads without rays.
        Receptacle not bristly; corolla not deeply cleft.
           Pappus hair-like in pistillate flowers; club shaped
            in staminate.                                  =Antennaria.=
           Pappus of all the flowers similar.               =Anaphalis.=
        Receptacle long bristly; corolla deeply cleft.
           Leaves and usually the involucral bracts prickly   =Carduus.=
           Leaves and involucral bracts not prickly.        =Saussurea.=

[Sidenote: =Chrysopsis hispida= (Hook.) Nutt. _Hispid Golden Aster._]

Stems numerous from a woody rootstock, rough-hairy throughout,
spreading, 6—12 inches long. Leaves spatulate to oblong, entire,
spreading, ¾—1½ inches long, obtuse at the apex, narrowed at the base,
often into petioles half as long as the blade or more. Heads very
numerous, about ½ an inch broad; involucre less than ½ an inch high,
its bracts lanceolate, rough-hairy; ray flowers bright yellow, ¼ of an
inch or more long.

In dry soil through the lower valleys throughout the Rockies; flowering
in midsummer.

[Sidenote: =Solidago multiradiata= Ait. _Northern Goldenrod._]

Stems smooth or somewhat hairy above, slender, 6—15 inches high.
Leaves firm, smooth or nearly so, the basal and lower ones spatulate
or oblanceolate, entire or sparingly serrate, obtuse, finely
reticulate-veined, 3—5 inches long, the upper smaller and narrower,
entire. Heads about ⅓ of an inch high, usually few in a rather compact
terminal cyme; bracts of the involucre thin, linear-lanceolate, acute,
smooth; rays 8—15, large.

On open hillsides throughout the region; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Solidago decumbens= Greene. _Field Goldenrod._]

Stems clustered at the summit of a strong, perpendicular root, stout,
decumbent, 6—18 inches high, usually dark red and sparsely hairy.
Leaves spatulate-obovate to oblanceolate, obtuse or acutish, more
or less distinctly serrate toward the summit, upper cauline leaves
similar but few and reduced, all rough on the margins. Heads large in
a thyrsoid panicle; bracts of the involucre glandular-viscid, linear,
obtuse, of firm texture, nerved; rays large.

[Sidenote: =Solidago missouriensis= Nutt. _Missouri Goldenrod._]

Smooth, rather slender, 3—5 feet high. Leaves firm or thick, those
of the stem linear-lanceolate and sessile, acuminate at the apex,
narrowed at the base, 2—4 inches long, rough-margined, triple-nerved,
entire or sparingly serrate with low sharp teeth, the basal and lowest
ones longer, spatulate and petioled. Heads ⅛—¼ of an inch high on one
side of the spreading or recurving branches of the short panicle;
bracts of the involucre oblong, greenish-tipped, obtuse; rays 6—13,
short.

In dry soil on the edges of woodland at the lower altitudes throughout
the Rockies; flowering in August.

[Sidenote: =Solidago canadensis= L. _Canada Goldenrod._]

Stout, rough-hairy or slightly so, 2—8 feet high. Leaves lanceolate,
triple-nerved, acute at each end, the lower ones sharply serrate and
petioled, 3—6 inches long, ⅓—1 inch wide, the upper smaller, entire.
Heads small, ⅛ of an inch or less high, very numerous on one side of
the spreading or recurved branches of the usually large and dense
panicle; involucral bracts linear, obtuse or acutish; rays 9—15 small.

In open usually dry soil at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies;
flowering during July and August.

[Illustration: _a_ Erigeron salsuginosus (Rich.) A. Gray. Large Purple
Fleabane.

_b_ Erigeron acris L. Blue Fleabane.

_c_ Saussurea densa Hook. Saussurea. (⅗ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Erigeron simplex= Greene. _Arctic Fleabane._]

Stems 1—6 inches high, several from the same root. Leaves few, the
basal spatulate or oblanceolate, 1—2 inches long; stem leaves linear
and few. Heads ⅓ of an inch in diameter, solitary; involucre usually
rough-hairy as well as woolly, bracts linear acute, rather close, rays
¼—⅓ of an inch long, white, very numerous.

An alpine plant in dry ground at the higher elevations, among stones
and on the moraines, flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Erigeron salsuginosus= (Richards) A. Gray. _Large Purple
Fleabane._]

Soft hairy above, 12—20 inches high. Leaves smooth, thick,
bright green, spatulate or nearly ovate, acute or conspicuously
bristle-tipped, the uppermost small and bract-like. Heads over 1½
inches in diameter; rays 50—70, purple or violet, ½—¾ of an inch long;
disc bright yellow; involucral bracts linear, attenuate and spreading,
glandular-hairy.

A most striking violet or purple daisy on moist banks, slopes, and in
moist, open woodlands; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Erigeron asper= Nutt. _Rough Fleabane._]

Stem simple or branched above, more or less hairy, sometimes roughly
so, 6—24 inches high. Leaves smooth, hairy or fringed on the margin
with hairs, entire, the basal ones spatulate, obtuse, 2—4 inches long,
narrowed into a margined petiole; stem leaves oblong-lanceolate or
linear-lanceolate, obtuse or acute, the upper smaller. Heads several or
solitary, slender peduncled, ⅓—½ an inch broad; involucre hemispheric,
its bracts linear, acute, or rough-hairy; rays 100—150, very narrow,
violet-purple or nearly white, ⅓ to nearly half an inch long.

In dry soil in the lower valleys and slopes of the Rockies; flowering
in July.

[Sidenote: =Erigeron cæspitosus= Nutt. _Tufted Fleabane._]

Stems tufted, closely white-hairy from a deep root; simple or
branched above, 6—12 inches high. Leaves white-hairy, entire,
narrowly oblanceolate or spatulate, obtuse or acutish, 1—3 inches
long; stem-leaves linear or linear-oblong, acute or obtuse, the
upper gradually shorter. Heads solitary or several, short-peduncled,
⅓—½ an inch broad; involucre hemispheric its bracts lanceolate or
linear-oblong acute, white-hairy; rays 40—60, ¼—⅓ of an inch long,
white or pinkish.

In dry open places in the Rockies at the lower altitudes, a pretty
tufted plant resembling an Aster; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Erigeron multifidus= Rydb. _Daisy Fleabane._]

Rough-hairy or somewhat smooth, stems slender, numerous, 3—6 inches
high. Leaves crowded on the crowns of the caudex, usually twice
ternately parted into linear or spatulate hairy lobes; an inch long or
less including the petiole; stem-leaves narrow or scale-like. Flowers
solitary at the top of the nearly leafless hairy stem; involucre ¼ of
an inch high and nearly ½ an inch in diameter, outer bracts shorter and
spreading; rays 40—60, white, purple or violet, from ⅛ to nearly ½ an
inch long.

On dry rocks throughout the Rockies up to 6000 feet elevation or above,
flowering during June or July.

_Erigeron multifidus discoideus (A. Gray.) Rydb._, differing from
the species in the entire absence of ray flowers and smaller heads,
and _Erigeron multifidus nudus Rydb._, differing from the species
in being almost entirely smooth except a few hairs on the petioles
and involucral bracts, are found in similar localities throughout
the Rockies, often growing with the species and frequently much more
abundant.

[Illustration: Erigeron discoideus Rydb. Erigeron multifidus Rydb. (½
Nat.) Cut-Leaved Fleabane.]

[Illustration: Erigeron melanocephalus A. Nelson. (¾ Nat.) Black-Headed
Fleabane.]

[Sidenote: =Erigeron aureus= Greene _Golden Fleabane._]

Ashy-hairy, 3—6 inches high from a tufted caudex. Leaves ovate,
spatulate or roundish, an inch or more long, contracted into a petiole;
stem leaves ¼ of an inch long, few, and very narrow. Flowers solitary,
about ⅓ of an inch high and broad; involucre usually reddish or
purplish, covered with woolly hairs; bracts nearly equal, lanceolate,
rather loose; rays numerous, ¼—⅓ of an inch long, deep golden yellow.

In open ground on alpine meadows and among rocks, at the higher
altitudes, throughout the region; a striking little plant, flowering in
July.

[Sidenote: =Erigeron melanocephalus= A. Nelson. _Black-woolly
Fleabane._]

Stems few or several, slender, erect, 2—6 inches high, with
purplish-black hairs. Leaves numerous, elliptic or narrowly oblong,
¾—1½ inches long, nearly smooth; stem leaves broadly linear, acuminate,
¾—1 inch long, hairiness similar to that of the stem. Head solitary, ⅓
of an inch broad; involucral scales nearly equal, with attenuate tips,
densely covered with purplish-black wool; rays 50—60, white or pinkish,
⅛ of an inch long.

In open stony or more or less grassy ground at the high altitudes;
flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Erigeron acris= L. _Blue Fleabane._]

More or less hairy, varying to smooth, 3—18 inches high, simple or
branching. Leaves spatulate or lanceolate, obtuse, 1—3 inches long,
hairy and entire. Heads ¼ of an inch or more broad, single or several,
more or less paniculately disposed; involucre hemispheric, its bracts
linear and hairy; rays numerous, very narrow, only slightly exceeding
the yellow disc, blue or purple.

In dry stony ground and slopes throughout the region, very variable as
to size; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Erigeron drobrachiensis= O. Muell.]

Nearly or quite smooth, 1—2 feet high, usually paniculately branched.
Leaves spatulate to lanceolate, acute, rather numerous. Heads on
peduncle-like branches, an inch or more long, involucre, ⅓ of an inch
or more broad, scales narrowly lanceolate, attenuate and glandular,
green; rays numerous and thread-like, pink, but slightly exceeding the
disc.

On banks and more or less shaded places at the lower altitudes
throughout the Rockies; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Erigeron philadelphicus= L. _Philadelphia Fleabane._]

Soft-hairy or sometimes nearly smooth, stems slender, mostly branched
above, 1—3 feet high. Leaves spatulate or obovate, obtuse or acute,
dentate or entire, 1—3 inches long. Heads several or numerous,
corymbose-paniculate, ¼—⅓ of an inch broad; involucre depressed
hemispheric, its bracts linear with roughened margins; rays 100—150,
¼—⅓ of an inch long, bright rose-colour.

In open grassy and wet places at the lower altitudes, throughout the
Rockies; flowering in June and July. This species, the most widely
distributed of any member of the genus, is found throughout North
America; though locally rare, where found it is usually in great
abundance.

[Sidenote: =Aster Richardsonii= Spreng. _Richardson’s Aster._]

Hairy, often much branched from the base, 3—12 inches high. Leaves
oblong, spatulate to broadly lanceolate, more or less sharply serrate,
an inch or more long. Heads solitary, terminating the stem or branches;
involucre broadly campanulate, ¼ of an inch high, shorter than the
disc; the bracts narrowly lanceolate, with mostly acute and loose
herbaceous tips; rays nearly half an inch long, violet-purple.

In gravelly ground and river bottoms frequent in the region; flowering
during July.

[Sidenote: =Aster conspicuus= Lindl. _Large Purple Aster._]

Rough, stout, and rigid, 2 feet high. Leaves firm, ovate, oblong, or
the lower obovate, acute, 4—6 inches long, 1½—4 inches broad, acutely
serrate, reticulate-veiny. Flowers numerous in a broad head, involucre,
broadly campanulate, equalling the disc, half an inch high; bracts in
several series, minutely glandular, lanceolate, acute, the greenish
tips a little spreading; rays ½ an inch long or more, violet.

The most showy of all the Asters, frequent in the Rockies at the lower
altitudes, on slides and on gravelly river banks, forming great masses
of colour when flowering in late July and early August.

[Sidenote: =Aster major= (Hook) Porter. _Great Northern Aster._]

Stem stout, leafy to the summit, densely long-hairy, or rarely smooth,
branched above, 2—6 feet high. Leaves rather thin, lanceolate, partly
clasping by a narrowed base, acuminate at the apex, sharply serrate
with low distant teeth, dark green and lightly hairy above, densely
soft-hairy on the veins beneath, 3—5 inches long, ½ to nearly an inch
wide. Heads mostly solitary, at the ends of short branches, 1½ inches
broad; involucre hemispheric, its bracts little imbricated, green,
linear-subulate, densely glandular; rays 35—45 purple, about ½ an inch
long.

In moist soil in the valleys of the Selkirks; flowering during August.

[Sidenote: =Aster Lindleyanus= T. & G. _Lindley’s Aster._]

Stem usually stout, smooth, or sparingly hairy, 1—3 feet high, branched
above. Leaves rather thick, smooth or slightly hairy, especially on
the veins, the lower and basal ones heart-shaped at the base, sharply
serrate, ovate-acute or acuminate, 2—4 inches long, with slender, naked
petioles; upper leaves ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, more or less
serrate or entire, sessile or with margined petioles. Heads usually
not numerous, ⅓ of an inch or more high; involucre broadly top-shaped;
bracts linear-lanceolate, acute, rather loosely imbricated, smooth or
nearly so, their tips green, rays 10—20, blue or violet, ¼—½ an inch
long; pappus nearly white.

In open places and along the rivers throughout the region; flowering
during July and August.

[Illustration: Aster Lindleyanus T. & G. (⅔ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Aster ciliomarginatus= Rydb.]

Stems 1—2 feet high, round, slightly striate and tinged with red,
smooth below, more or less hairy in lines above. Basal leaves smooth
except the hairy-fringed margins, thin, distantly serrate or subentire,
tapering into wing-margined petioles, oblanceolate-acute, 4—8 inches
long; the upper oblong or lanceolate sessile. Heads about ½ an inch
high, ½—¾ of an inch in diameter, rather few in an open panicle;
involucral bracts linear, fringed with hairs on the margins, the upper
part foliaceous and the outer somewhat spreading; rays numerous ½ an
inch long, light blue.

In moist, more or less shaded places, edges of woods and thickets,
throughout the Rockies; flowering in late July and August.

[Sidenote: =Aster frondeus= (A. Gray) Greene. _Leafy-bracted Aster._]

Simple, stem smooth, with sparing, erect, flowering branches. Leaves
few, broadly lanceolate to oblong or spatulate, entire or nearly
so, the lower tapering into winged petioles. Heads solitary or few,
on naked peduncles; involucre ⅓ of an inch high, or less; bracts
linear-lanceolate, loose, all equalling the disc; rays violet or
purple, nearly ½ an inch long.

In wet places and along streams throughout the Rockies; flowering
during July and August.

[Sidenote: =Eucephalus Engelmanni= (D. C. Eaton) Greene. _Engelmann’s
Aster._]

Slightly hairy or smooth, simple or somewhat branched, 18 inches
to 2 feet high, bright green. Leaves thin, ovate-oblong to broadly
lanceolate, 2—4 inches long, loosely veined, tapering at the apex into
a slender-spined tip, the larger sometimes with a few small acute
teeth. Heads ½ an inch high, hemispherical, either racemosely disposed
on slender axillary peduncles, or somewhat cymose; involucral bracts
mostly acute or acuminate, some outer ones loose, narrow, and partly
herbaceous, or with loose pointed tips; inner purplish; rays about ½ an
inch long, spreading, violet or pinkish.

In open woods and on slopes, principally in the Rockies at the higher
elevations; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Rudbeckia hirta= L. _Black-eyed Susan, Yellow Daisy._]

Rough-hairy throughout, stems simple or sparingly branched, often
tufted, 1—3 feet high. Leaves thick, sparingly serrate with low teeth
or entire, lanceolate or oblong, the lower and basal ones petioled,
mostly obtuse, 3—5-nerved, 2—7 inches long, ½—2 inches wide, the upper
sessile, narrower, acute or acutish. Heads commonly few or solitary,
2—4 inches broad; rays 10—20, deep yellow or orange; bracts of the
involucre very rough-hairy; spreading or reflexed, much shorter than
the rays; disc globose-ovoid, purple-brown.

Throughout the region, not infrequent along the railway from Field west
to the valley of the Columbia at Beavermouth; flowering in July and
August.

[Sidenote: =Helianthus scaberrimus= Ell. _Stiff Sunflower._]

Stems simple or a little branched, rough-hairy or only slightly so, 1—8
feet high. Leaves thick, leathery, serrate, rough-hairy on both sides,
2—7 inches long, ½—2 inches wide, acute at the apex, narrowed at the
base, the lower ovate or ovate-oblong, petioled, the upper lanceolate
or oblong-lanceolate, sessile or short-petioled, all opposite, or the
uppermost bract-like and alternate. Heads solitary or few, 2—3 inches
broad, involucre hemispheric, its bracts ovate, acute or obtuse,
fringed with hairs; disc brown or purple; rays 15—25, light yellow.

Frequent along the railway in the valley of the Kicking Horse River and
in the valley of the Columbia at Beavermouth; flowering in August.

[Sidenote: =Helianthus Nuttallii= Torr and Gray. _Nuttall’s Sunflower._]

Stem smooth, except the summit which is soft-hairy, slender, mostly
simple, 2—4 feet high. Leaves rough on both surfaces, lanceolate or
the upper linear, 3—6 inches long, ¼—¾ of an inch wide, frequently
opposite, serrulate or entire. Heads ½ an inch high, scattered; bracts
of the involucre linear-lanceolate with a subulate tip, hairy at the
base; rays narrow, acute, deep yellow, 1—1½ inches long.

In moist grounds and on river banks throughout the Rockies at the lower
altitudes; flowering during July.

[Illustration: _a_ Erigeron aureus Greene. Golden Fleabane.

_b_ Gaillardia aristata Pursh. (⅗ Nat.) Great-flowered Gaillardia.]

[Sidenote: =Gaillardia aristata= Pursh. _Great-flowered Gaillardia._]

Rough-hairy, stems simple or little branched, 1—3 feet high. Leaves
firm, densely and finely hairy, the lower basal ones petioled, oblong
or spatulate, laciniate-pinnatifid or entire, mostly obtuse, 2—5 inches
long; upper leaves sessile, lanceolate or oblong, entire or dentate,
rarely pinnatifid. Heads 1½-4 inches broad, long peduncled; bracts
of the involucre spreading, lanceolate, acuminate, rough-hairy, rays
10—18, bright yellow, wedge-shaped, deeply 3-lobed; disc reddish-purple.

One of the most showy of the midsummer plants, in the lower valleys of
the Rockies, in dry ground and on slopes, especially in the Bow Valley
at Banff and in the open country around Golden.

[Sidenote: =Arnica cordifolia= Hook. _Heart-leaved Arnica._]

Somewhat hairy, stem simple or sparingly branched, 1—2 feet high.
Leaves hairy, the basal ovate or orbicular, obtuse or acute, deeply
cordate at the base, dentate, 1—3 inches long with slender sometimes
margined petioles; stem leaves in 1—3 pairs, ovate or oblong, sessile
or short-petioled, much smaller. Heads 1—8, 2—3 inches broad, bracts
of the involucre, acute or acuminate, ½—¾ of an inch long; rays 12—16,
deep yellow, an inch or more long, toothed at the apex; pappus white.

In woods and thickets at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Arnica gracilis= Rydb. _Slender Arnica._]

Smooth, slender and branched, 6—12 inches high. Leaves with short
glandular hairs on both surfaces or smooth, the basal broadly ovate,
petioled, dentate, 3-ribbed; stem-leaves about 2 pairs, similar, the
upper sessile. Heads several on slender glandular peduncles, disc ½ an
inch or less high; involucral bracts, 12—15, lanceolate, acuminate,
glandular-hairy as are also the seeds; pappus white; rays about ¾ of an
inch long, narrow, bright yellow with a single notch at the apex.

On alpine slopes throughout the Rockies; flowering in July, not common.

[Illustration: _a_ Arnica cordifolia Hook. Heart-Leaved Arnica.

_b_ Arnica louiseana Farr. Pale-Flowered Arnica. (⅗ Nat.)]

[Sidenote: =Arnica latifolia= Bong. _Broad-leaved Arnica._]

Minutely hairy or nearly smooth, simple or branched. Leaves thin,
nearly smooth, or with long scattered hairs; the lower cordate; stem
leaves in 2—3 pairs, equal, ovate or oval, sharply dentate, closely
sessile by the broad base, or the lowest with contracted bases. Heads
¾ of an inch high on long, slender, hairy peduncles; involucral bracts
½ an inch or more long; oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, with scattered
hairs, rays yellow, ¾ of an inch long, with 2 notches at the apex;
achenes nearly smooth; pappus white.

Throughout the region in woods and open ground usually at an elevation
of 5000 to 7000 feet; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Arnica Chamissonis= Less. _Chamisso’s Arnica._]

From lightly hairy to densely so or nearly smooth, 1—2 feet high.
Leaves rather thin, hairy, oblong to oblong-lanceolate, dentate or
denticulate, acute or obtuse, lowest tapering into a margined petiole,
upper broad at the base and somewhat clasping. Heads ½ an inch or more
high, single or several on hairy peduncles; involucral bracts ⅓ of an
inch or more long, oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, glandular-hairy; rays
bright yellow, ½ an inch or more long with a single notch at the apex,
rather broad; achenes with a few scattered hairs; pappus tawny.

On the borders of streams and wet places at the lower altitudes
throughout the region; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Arnica louiseana= Farr. _Pale-flowered Arnica._]

Slender, hairy, 3—8 inches high. Leaves in about 3 pairs, the two
lowest at the base of the stem, 1½—2 inches long, elliptical or
obovate, entire or denticulate, glandular-hairy on both surfaces, as
are the margins. Heads of flowers, 1—3, nearly half an inch broad,
on long, slender, nodding, hairy peduncles; rays 8—10, light yellow,
about ½ an inch long; involucre ⅓ of an inch high, campanulate, densely
glandular-hairy at the base, brownish-purple, the bracts lanceolate,
acute, with scattered white hairs; pappus white.

Among loose stones at the base of Mt. Fairview at Lake Louise;
flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Arnica fulgens= Pursh. _Alpine Arnica._]

Glandular-hairy throughout, 8—12 inches high. Leaves oblong lanceolate
to lanceolate, acute, the lower denticulate and petioled, the upper
sessile and entire. Heads of flowers several on long, slender,
glandular-hairy peduncles; involucres campanulate, ½ an inch high,
bracts lanceolate acute, glandular and with long white hairs; rays
bright yellow ¾—1 inch long, ¼ of an inch wide, twice notched at the
apex; achenes hairy; pappus white.

On stony alpine slopes at the higher altitudes throughout the Rockies;
flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Arnica eradiata= (A. Gray.) Heller. _Rayless Arnica._]

Densely soft-hairy throughout; simple or branched, 12—18 inches high.
Leaves oblong, ovate-lanceolate or the upper ones lanceolate, obtuse or
acute, entire or sharply denticulate, 1—3 inches long. Heads of flowers
on short, hairy peduncles, without rays; involucre ½ an inch high,
bracts lanceolate, acute; achenes black, smooth or nearly so; pappus
tawny.

On grassy alpine slopes through the Rockies at the higher elevations;
flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Senecio pseudaureus= Rydb. _Western Golden Ragwort._]

Smooth from a creeping rootstock, 1—2 feet high. Leaves smooth,
basal broadly ovate, somewhat cordate, serrate, 1½—3 inches long,
long-petioled; stem leaves more or less laciniate at the base, the
upper sessile. Heads of flowers ⅓ of an inch high in a flat-topped
corymb, rays bright orange-yellow, ⅓ of an inch long.

In moist ground and borders of woods and slopes throughout the Rockies
at the lower altitudes; flowering during June and early July.

[Sidenote: =Senecio discoideus= (Hook.) Britton. _Northern Squaw-root._]

Smooth except for the small tufts of wool in the axils of the lower
leaves; stem rather stout, 1—2 feet tall. Basal leaves oval or ovate,
thin, sharply dentate, abruptly narrowed into petioles longer than the
blade; stem leaves few, small, more or less irregularly cut. Heads few
or numerous, corymbose; bracts of the involucre narrowly linear, nearly
½ an inch high; rays very short or wanting; achenes smooth.

Frequent throughout the Rockies on river shores and borders of woods
and thickets; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Senecio flavovirens= Rydb. _Western Balsam Groundsel._]

Light or yellowish-green, slender, woolly in tufts at the base of
the leaves or smooth in age; stem 12—18 inches high, striate, pale.
Leaves 1—3 inches long, at the base obovate or broadly oval, generally
tapering into the petiole but sometimes truncate at the base, obtuse,
crenate or sinuate, light green; lower stem-leaves lanceolate in
outline and petioled, the upper lanceolate or linear and sessile,
deeply pinnatifid with narrow oblong or linear segments, cymes
contracted, corymbose. Heads ¼ of an inch or more high; bracts linear,
acute, yellowish-green and occasionally with brownish tips; rays pale
yellow, ½ an inch long, 4-nerved or often lacking.

In the lower valleys of the Rockies, on the borders of woods, thickets,
and marshes; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Senecio canus= Hook. _Silvery Groundsel._]

Permanently silvery-hairy with felted hairs; stems several, 6—12 inches
high from a woody base. Leaves sometimes all undivided, the radicle
and lower from spatulate to oblong or roundish-oval, ½—1½ inches long,
slender-petioled, sometimes laciniate-toothed, or pinnatifid. Heads of
flowers few and terminal, ⅓ to nearly half an inch high; rays yellow,
nearly ½ an inch long.

In stony dry ground and slopes throughout the Rockies at the lower
altitudes; flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Senecio lugens= Richards. _Black-tipped Groundsel._]

More or less woolly when young, soon smooth; stem stout, 1—3 feet high.
Basal and lower leaves oblong or oval, obtuse or acute, denticulate
or dentate, 2—5 inches long, ½—1½ inches wide, narrowed into margined
petioles; upper leaves few, sessile, small and bract-like. Heads of
flowers several or numerous, corymbose, often short-peduncled, ½ to
nearly an inch broad; involucre campanulate, ¼—⅓ of an inch high, its
bracts lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, acute, green with conspicuous
black tips; rays 10—12, bright yellow, ½ an inch long.

In moist soil at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies; flowering
in June.

[Sidenote: =Senecio triangularis= Hook. _Giant Ragwort._]

Rather stout, simple, 2—5 feet high. Leaves thin, all more or
less petioled and dentate, deltoid-lanceolate or the lower
triangular-hastate or deltoid-cordate, the uppermost lanceolate, with
cuneate base. Heads of flowers about ½ an inch high, numerous in a
flat open cyme; involucre campanulate; rays 8—12, bright yellow,
oblong-linear, ¼—⅓ of an inch long.

In wet ground and along the borders of streams and wet slopes at 5000
to 6000 feet elevation throughout the Rockies; at much lower altitudes
in the Selkirks where it is a very abundant plant; flowering in June
and early July.

[Sidenote: =Petasites palmata= (Ait.) A. Gray. _Palmate-leaved
Coltsfoot._]

Scape slender and scaly, 6—24 inches high. Leaves nearly orbicular
in outline, 3—12 inches broad, deeply 7—11-cleft to much beyond the
middle, green and smooth above, densely white-woolly beneath, at
least when young; the lobes oblong to obovate-acute, often somewhat
wedge-shaped, sharply dentate or cut. Heads mostly diœcious, numerous,
corymbose, ⅓—½ an inch broad; flowers usually white, fragrant, the
marginal ones of the pistillate heads with narrow pinkish or white rays
about ¼ of an inch long; cottony in fruit.

In wet places and along streams at the lower altitudes throughout the
Rockies; flowering in May and early June before the leaves appear.

[Sidenote: =Petasites sagittata= (Pursh.) A. Gray. _Arrow-leaved
Coltsfoot._]

Scape slender and scaly, 6—12 inches high. Leaves deltoid-ovate or
reniform-ovate, persistently white-tomentose beneath; smooth or nearly
so above, 4—10 inches long, thin, margins sinuate-dentate, not cleft or
lobed. Heads diœcious, loosely corymbose, involucre campanulate, ⅓ of
an inch high; flowers nearly white, the marginal ones of the pistillate
heads with white rays.

In similar situations to the preceding; in wet places and along streams
at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies; readily distinguished by
the shape of its leaves; flowering in May and early June.

[Sidenote: =Petasites frigida= (L.) Fries. _Arctic Coltsfoot._]

Scape very, scaly, 3—10 inches high. Leaves thin, hastate-reniform to
triangular-ovate, 1—4 inches long, irregularly and angulately lobed and
incised, smooth and green above, persistently white-woolly beneath,
the lobes entire or few-toothed. Heads usually few, ½ an inch or more
high in a capitate corymb; involucre short, campanulate; flowers nearly
white and fragrant, the marginal ones of the pistillate heads with
white or pinkish rays ¼ of an inch or more long.

In shaded wet places and along alpine brooks at the high altitudes
throughout the region; flowering during June and July with the
expanding leaves.

[Sidenote: =Achillea lanulosa= Nutt. _Yarrow._]

Woolly throughout; stems simple, 6 inches to 2 feet high. Leaves
narrowly oblong in outline, bi-pinnately dissected into numerous small
linear divisions. Heads numerous, crowded into a rather contracted
cyme; involucre oblong, nearly ¼ of an inch high; bracts lanceolate,
green with brown translucent borders; rays 4—5, white, broadly obovate,
notched and spreading, about the length of the involucre.

Open ground, slopes and meadows throughout the region; flowering during
July.

[Sidenote: =Chrysanthemum leucanthemum= L. _Ox-eye Daisy. White Daisy._]

Smooth, simple, 1—3 feet high, often tufted, the branches nearly
erect. Leaves smooth, the basal oblong or spatulate, coarsely dentate
or incised, narrowed into long, slender petioles; stem-leaves mostly
sessile or partly clasping, 1—3 inches long, linear, pinnately-incised
or toothed, the uppermost small, nearly entire. Heads few or solitary,
1—2 inches broad on long naked peduncles, rays 20—30, white and
spreading; disc flat, bright yellow, bracts of the involucre lanceolate
or obtuse, smooth with translucent margins.

In open ground throughout the region; flowering during July.

[Sidenote: =Artemisia frigida= Willd _Pasture Wormwood._]

Simple or branching, silky-hairy and silvery throughout; stems numerous
and spreading, about a foot high. Leaves mainly twice ternately divided
into linear crowded lobes. Heads globular, about ⅛ of an inch in
diameter, numerous, in more or less racemose heads; involucre pale,
greenish-yellow, woolly; bracts narrow and herbaceous.

In open dry ground and on banks throughout the Rockies at the lower
altitudes; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Artemisia discolor= Dougl. _Green Wormwood._]

Stems slender, 9—12 inches high, spreading from a woody base. Leaves
pinnately parted into narrow, linear or lanceolate, entire or spreading
cut divisions and lobes, white beneath with cottony hairs, green and
nearly smooth above. Heads ⅛ of an inch high, numerous in a wand-like
panicle; involucre hemispherical-campanulate, greenish and smooth or
nearly so, 20—30 flowered.

On Rocky slopes throughout the region; flowering in June or July.

[Sidenote: =Antennaria lanata= (Hook.) Greene. _Alpine Everlasting._]

Densely white-woolly; stem simple, 2—6 inches high. Lower leaves
spatulate-lanceolate, 1—1½ inches long, the upper linear with
conspicuous papery tips. Heads several in a close cluster at the end
of the stem, ½ an inch high; involucre nearly ¼ of an inch high,
conspicuously woolly at the base, the inner bracts with conspicuous
white tips, the outer straw-colour or greenish.

An alpine plant in meadows and on slopes from 7000 feet up; flowering
during July.

[Sidenote: =Antennaria pulcherrima= (Hook.) Greene. _Tall Alpine
Everlasting._]

White-woolly throughout, stem simple, 6—18 inches high. Leaves
spatulate to lanceolate or linear, 1—4 inches long, acute, nerved.
Heads numerous in a close capitate cluster, ½—1 inch high, outer
bracts of the involucre straw-colour or greenish, rounded and often
notched at the apex; inner ones nearly white.

In moist open ground in the Rockies at the lower elevations; flowering
in July.

[Sidenote: =Antennaria racemose= Hook. _White Everlasting._]

Lightly woolly, becoming smooth, stems 6—20 inches high, slender,
sparsely leafy. Leaves thin, the radicle broadly oval, an inch or two
long, obscurely 3-nerved at the base, rather veiny, the lower stem
leaves oblong, the upper smaller and lanceolate. Heads of flowers
about ¼ of an inch high, all on slender peduncles in a loose raceme,
involucral bracts, thin and translucent, greenish-yellow or brownish.

On shaded slopes throughout the Rockies, at the higher altitudes;
flowering in June.

[Sidenote: =Antennaria Howellii= Greene. _Howell’s Everlasting._]

More or less woolly; stem 6—10 inches high. Leaves rather thin, the
lower spatulate, acute, 1—2 inches long, green above, woolly beneath;
stem leaves lanceolate, clasping, 1 inch long, becoming smaller toward
the summit. Heads in a compact capitate cluster, ½ an inch or more in
diameter, woolly at the base; involucral bracts very narrow, acute,
thin, and translucent, straw-colour, the outer ones densely woolly and
occasionally rosy.

In dry ground and on slopes, frequent in the Rockies at the lower
altitudes.

[Sidenote: =Antennaria parvifolia= Nutt. _Mountain Everlasting._]

Plant silvery throughout, freely spreading; stems prostrate and leafy,
forming mats of considerable extent; flowering stems 2—8 inches high.
Leaves from obovate to spatulate, ½ an inch or less long, persistently
white-woolly. Heads in compact terminal clusters about ⅓ of an inch
broad; involucral bracts, lanceolate, obtuse, thin and translucent,
yellowish.

In dry sterile ground at the lower altitudes throughout the Rockies;
flowering in June, frequently growing with the next species which it
closely resembles in manner of growth.

[Sidenote: =Antennaria rosea= (D. C. Eaton) Greene. _Pink Everlasting._]

Silvery throughout, stems prostrate and leafy, forming broad mats;
flowering stems 6—15 inches high. Leaves very thin in texture, densely
hairy, lanceolate to linear, ½—1½ inches long, acute. Heads small,
closely compacted into a rounded terminal cluster, ½ an inch or more in
diameter; involucral bracts in 2 series, lanceolate, the outer greenish
and woolly, the inner from pink to bright rose-colour.

In dry sterile or moist open ground throughout the Rockies up to an
elevation of 6,000 feet; flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Anaphalis subalpina= (A. Gray) Rydb. _Pearly Everlasting._]

A foot or two high in tufts, very leafy, the white tufts of woolly
hairs rarely becoming tawny. Leaves 2—5 inches long, broadly
lanceolate, green above, white-woolly beneath. Heads numerous, ¼ of
an inch high in a contracted corymb; involucral bracts numerous,
ovate-lanceolate, pearly white, spreading in age.

Abundant throughout the region in dry or moist ground and on slopes up
to an altitude of 7000 feet; flowering in June and July.

[Sidenote: =Carduus Kelseyi= Rydb. _White Thistle._]

Stems 18 inches to 4 feet tall, striate, more or less cobwebby-woolly.
Leaves linear, sinuately toothed and fringed, with rather weak
spines, green above, cottony beneath. Heads several in a leafy spike,
1—1½ inches high, subtended by linear, cut and bristly-fringed and
cobwebby-hairy leaves; bracts rather unequal, lanceolate, a few of the
outermost with weak spines, the rest unarmed but with a long slender
tip; corolla cream-colour.

Open ground and on slopes at the lower altitudes throughout the
Rockies; flowering in July.

[Sidenote: =Carduus undulatus= Nutt. _Wavy-leaved Thistle._]

Persistently white-tomentose, 1—3 feet high, branching. Leaves rarely
pinnately parted, moderately prickly. Heads of flowers about 1½ inches
high, usually solitary at the ends of the branches; principal bracts
of the involucre mostly thickened on the back by the broader glandular
sticky ridge, comparatively small and narrow, tipped with a short
spreading prickle; corollas rose-colour or pale purple.

In open grounds throughout the Rockies at the lower altitudes;
flowering during July and August.

[Sidenote: =Saussurea densa= Hook. _Saussurea._]

Nearly smooth, with a decumbent base; 3—12 inches high. Leaves thin,
oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, sinuate-dentate, or entire. Heads of
flowers several in a compact terminal corymb, involucre campanulate,
½ an inch high; bracts lanceolate, acuminate, nearly equal; corolla
purple or violet-blue.

On stony slopes or on the moraines at the higher altitudes throughout
the Rockies, not common, but frequent in the region around Lake Louise;
flowering during July.




INDEX


               A
    Abies, 24
      lasiocarpa, 27
    Aceraceæ, 185
    Acer glabrum, 185
    Achillea, 285
      lanulosa, 314
    Actæa, 91
      arguta, 108
      eburnea, 109
    Adder’s-Tongue Family, 1
    Adiantum, 3
      pedatum, 6
    Agoseris, 276
      aurantiaca, 277
      glauca, 276
      graciliens, 277
      Large-flowered, 276
      Orange-flowered, 277
      Slender, 277
    Alder, Slender-leaved, 72
    Alexanders, Heart-leaved, 203
    Allium, 42
      recurvatum, 42
      sibericum, 43
    Alnus tenuifolia, 72
    Alsine, 82
      borealis, 86
      læta, 86
      longipes, 85
    Alum-root,
      Smooth, 134
      Round-leaved, 135
    Amelanchier alnifolia, 166
    Anaphalis, 285
      subalpina, 320
    Androsace, 226
      carinata, 228
      diffusa, 229
      septentrionalis, 229
      Alpine, 229
      Spreading, 229
      Sweet-flowered, 228
    Anemone, 91
      Drummondii, 93
      globosa, 93
      parviflora, 92
      Alpine, 93
      Northern, 92
      Western, 95
    Antennaria, 285
      Howellii, 318
      lanata, 317
      parvifolia, 319
      pulcherrima, 317
      racemosa, 318
      rosea, 320
    Antiphylla, 130
      oppositifolia, 146
    APIACEÆ, 201
    APOCYNACEÆ, 237
    Apocynum, androsæmifolium, 237
    Apple Family, 165
    Aquilegia, 91
      brevistyla, 105
      flavescens, 106
      formosa, 106
    Arabis, 112
      Drummondii, 120
      hirsuta, 119
      Holboldii, 119
      Lyallii, 120
    ARACEÆ, 35
    Aragallus, 168
      deflexus, 176
      inflatus, 176
      Lamberti, 174
      monticola, 173
      splendens, 175
      viscidulus, 175
    ARALIACEÆ, 199
    Aralia nudicaulis, 199
    Arctostaphylos, 212
      uva-ursi, 214
    Arenaria, 82
      capillaris nardifolia, 88
      sajanensis, 89
      verna equicaulis, 89
    Argentina, 151
      anserina, 159
    Arnica, 285
      Chamissonis, 306
      cordifolia, 304
      eradiata, 308
      fulgens, 307
      gracilis, 304
      latifolia, 305
      louiseana, 306
      Alpine, 307
      Broad-leaved, 305
      Chamisso’s, 306
      Heart-leaved, 304
      Pale-flowered, 306
      Rayless, 308
      Slender, 304
    Artemisia, 285
      discolor, 316
      frigida, 316
    Arum Family, 35
    Aruncus, 150
      Aruncus, 153
    Aspen, American, 69
    Asphodel,
      False, 40
      Scottish, 40
      Western False, 41
    Asplenium, 4
      Filix-fœmina, 9
      viride, 9
    Aster, 285
      ciliomarginatus, 298
      conspicuus, 296
      frondeus, 299
      Lindleyanus, 298
      major, 297
      Richardsonii, 296
      Engelmann’s, 300
      Great Northern, 297
      Hispid Golden, 286
      Large Purple, 296
      Leafy-bracted, 299
      Lindley’s, 298
      Richardson’s, 296
    Astragalus, 168
      adsurgens, 169
      alpinus, 170
      convallarius, 171
      hypoglottis, 169
      Macouni, 171
    Atragene, 90
      columbiana, 91
    Avens,
      Drummond’s Mountain, 164
      Large-leaved, 162
      Purple-plumed, 163
      White Mountain, 163
      Yellow, 162
    Azaleastrum, 212
      albiflorum, 218

               B
    Baneberry,
      Western Red, 108
      Western White, 109
    Barberry Family, 109
    Batrachium, 91
      trichophyllum, 97
    Bear-berry, 214
      Alpine, 214
    Beard-tongue,
      Blue, 251
      Large Purple, 249
      Yellow, 250
    Bed-straw, Northern, 263
    Bellflower Family, 273
    BERBERIDACEÆ, 109
    Berberis aquifolium, 110
    Betony, Wood, 261
    Betula,
      glandulosa, 71
      occidentalis, 71
      papyrifera, 70
    BETULACEÆ, 70
    Bilberry,
      Alpine, 222
      Dwarf, 221
      Thin-leaved, 223
    Birch,
      Canoe, 70
      Family, 70
      Paper, 70
      Scrub, 71
      Western Red, 71
    Bishop’s-Cap, Naked, 132
    Bistort, Alpine, 78
    Black-eyed Susan, 201
    Bladder-pod, Double, 117
    Bladderwort Family, 262
    Bluebell, 274
    Blueberry, 222
    Blue-eyed Grass, 53
    Borage Family, 240
    BORAGINACEÆ, 240
    Botrychium,
      lunaria, 1
      simplex, 2
      virginianium, 2
    Bracken, 6
    Brake,
      American Rock, 7
      Slender Cliff, 8
    BRASSICACEÆ, 111
    Braya, 112
      humilis, 123
    Brooklime, American, 252
    Buckbean, 236
      Family, 236
    Buckwheat Family, 75
    Buffalo-berry, Canadian, 192
    Bunch-berry, 205
    Bunch-flower Family, 36
    Buttercup,
      Low, 102
      Meadow, 103
      Northern, 99
      Pursh’s, 98
      Snow, 100
    Butterwort, 262

               C
    Caltha, 91
      leptosepala, 104
    Calypso, 57
    Campanula,
      rotundifolia, 274
      uniflora, 273
    CAMPANULACEÆ, 273
    Campion, Moss, 82
    Capnodes aurea, 111
    CAPRIFOLIACEÆ, 264
    Cardamine, 112
      pennsylvanica, 118
    CARDUACEÆ, 283
    Carduus, 285
      Kelseyi, 321
      undulatus, 321
    CAROPHYLLACEÆ, 81
    Cassiope, 212
      Mertensiana, 215
    Castilleja, 248
      lanceifolia, 258
      miniata, 258
      pallida, 257
      purpurascens, 256
    Catchfly, Lyall’s, 83
    Cedar,
      Giant, 33
      Shrubby Red, 33
    CELASTRACEÆ, 184
    Celery Family, 201
    Cerastium, 82
      arvense strictum, 84
      behringianum, 85
    Chamænerion, 193
      angustifolium, 194
      latifolium, 194
    Cheilanthes, 4
      Féei, 8
    Cherry, Western Wild, 167
    Chickweed,
      Alpine, 85
      Field, 84
    Chicory Family, 275
    Chimaphila, 207
      umbellata, 211
    Chiogenes, 221
      hispidula, 224
    Christmas-green, Trailing, 20
    Chrysanthemum, 285
      leucanthemum, 315
    Chrysopsis hispida, 286
    Chrysosplenum, 129
      tetrandum, 130
    CICHORIACEÆ, 275
    Cinquefoil,
      Alpine, 161
      Cut-leaved, 160
      Marsh, 159
      Shrubby, 157
      Snowy, 160
    Circæa, 193
      alpina, 197
      pacifica, 198
    Claytonia,
      lanceolata, 80
      parviflora, 81
    Clintonia, 46
      uniflora, 46
    Club-moss,
      Alpine, 21
      Arctic, 20
      Family, 18
      Fir, 18
      Stiff, 19
    Cœloglossum, 55
      bracteatum, 63
    Collinsia, 248
      parviflora, 249
      Small, 249
    Coltsfoot,
      Arctic, 314
      Arrow-leaved, 213
      Palmate-leaved, 312
    Columbine,
      Small Blue, 105
      Western, 106
      Yellow, 106
    Comandra,
      livida, 74
      pallida, 74
      Northern, 74
      Pale, 74
    Comarum, 151
      palustre, 159
    CONVALLARIACEÆ, 45
    Coral-root,
      Early, 56
      Large, 57
    Corallorhiza, 54
      Corallorhiza, 56
      multiflora, 57
    CORNACEÆ, 205
    Cornus,
      canadensis intermedia, 205
      stolonifera, 206
    Corydalis, Golden, 111
    Cranberry,
      Mountain, 224
      Small, 225
      Tree, Few-flowered, 266
    CRASSULACEÆ, 125
    Crepis, 276
      elegans, 281
      nana, 280
    Cress,
      Drummond’s Rock, 120
      Hairy Rock, 119
      Lyall’s Rock, 120
      Northern Rock, 123
      Pennsylvania Bitter, 118
      Penny, 117
      Stony Rock, 119
      Water, 124
    Crowberry,
      Black, 183
      Family, 183
    Crowfoot,
      Creeping, 103
      Ditch, 99
      Family, 90
      White Water, 97
    Cryptogramma, 4
      acrostichoides, 7
      Stelleri, 8
    Currant, Howell’s, 149
    Cypripedium, 54
      parviflorum, 55
      passerinum, 55
    Cytherea, 54
      bulbosa, 57

               D
    Daisy,
      Ox-eye, 315
      White, 315
      Yellow, 301
    Dandelion, 278
      Mountain, 278
    Dasyphora, 151
      fruticosa, 157
    Delphinium, 91
      Brownii, 107
      Menziesii, 108
    Devil’s Club, 200
    Disporum, 46, 51
      Large-flowered, 52
      majus, 52
      oreganum, 51
    Dock,
      Pale-leaved, 77
      Sour, 77
    Dodecatheon, 226
      conjugens, 231
      pauciflorum, 230
    Dogbane,
      Family, 137
      Spreading, 237
    Dogwood,
      Family, 205
      Red-stemmed, 206
    Draba, 112
      andina, 114
      aurea, 115
      glacialis, 112
      incana, 116
      lonchocarpa, 115
      nivalis, 114
      oligosperma, 113
    DRUPACEÆ, 167
    Dryas, 151
      Drummondii, 164
      octopetala, 163
    Dryopteris, 4
      Filix-mas, 11
      oreopteris, 12
      spinulosa dilatata, 11

               E
    Echinopanax horridum, 200
    ELÆAGNACEÆ, 191
    Elæagnus, 191
      argentea, 191
    Elder,
      Black-berried, 265
      Red-berried, 264
    Elephantella, 248
      grœnlandica, 260
      Long-beaked, 260
    EMPETRACEÆ, 183
    Empetrum nigrum, 183
    Epilobium, 193
      alpinum, 196
      anagallidifolium, 196
      Hornemanni, 197
      luteum, 195
    EQUISETACEÆ, 14
    Equisetum,
      arvense, 15
      fluviatile, 16
      hyemale, 16
      scirpoides, 17
      sylvaticum, 15
      variegatum, 17
      Variegated, 17
    ERICACEÆ, 211
    Erigeron, 284
      acris, 294
      asper, 290
      aureus, 292
      cæspitosus, 291
      drobrachiensis, 294
      melanocephalus, 293
      multifidus, 291
      philadelphicus, 295
      salsuginosus, 289
      simplex, 289
    Eriogonum, 76
      ochroleucum, 79
      subalpinum, 78
      Tall White, 78
      Yellowish-White, 79
    Erysimum, 112
      inconspicuum, 121
    Erythronium,
      grandiflorum, 44
    Eucephalus, 285
      Engelmanni, 300
    Everlasting,
      Alpine, 317
      Howell’s, 318
      Mountain, 319
      Pearly, 320
      Pink, 320
      Tall Alpine, 317
      White, 318

               F
    Fern,
      Beech, Long, 5
      Beech, Western, 4
      Brittle, 13
      Family, 3
      Grape, Virginia, 2
      Holly, 10
      Lady, 9
      Lip, Hairy, 8
      Maidenhair, 6
      Male, 11
      Oak, 5
      Shield, Spinulose, 11
    Figwort Family, 248
    Filix, 4
      fragilis, 13
      montana, 14
    Fir,
      Balsam, 27
      Red, 28
      Sub-alpine, 27
    Fire-weed, 194
    Flax,
      Family, 182
      Lewis’s Wild, 182
    Fleabane,
      Arctic, 289
      Black-woolly, 293
      Blue, 294
      Daisy, 291
      Golden, 292
      Large Purple, 289
      Philadelphia, 295
      Rough, 290
      Tufted, 291
    Foam-Flower, 136
    Forget-me-not, 243
      False, 241, 242
    Fragaria, 151
      glauca, 158

               G
    Gaillardia, 285
      aristata, 303
      Great-flowered, 303
    Galium boreale, 263
    Garlic, 42
      Northern, 43
    Gaultheria, 212
      humifusa, 213
      ovatifolia, 213
    Gentian,
      Dwarf, 233
      Family, 231
      Four-parted, 233
      Glaucous, 234
      Large, 234
      Northern, 232
      Spurred, 235
    Gentiana, 232
      acuta, 232
      affinis, 234
      glauca, 234
      propinqua, 233
      prostrata, 233
    GENTIANACEÆ, 231
    Geum, 151
      macrophyllum, 162
      strictum, 162
    Ginseng Family, 199
    Globe-flower, Western, 104
    Goat’s-Beard, 153
    Golden Rod,
      Canada, 288
      Field, 287
      Missouri, 287
      Northern, 286
    Gooseberry,
      Bristly, 148
      Family, 146
      Northern, 148
      Swamp, 147
    Grass, Blue-eyed, 53
    Grass-of-Parnassus,
      Alpine, 128
      Family, 126
      Fringed, 126
      Marsh, 127
      Small-flowered, 127
    GROSSULARIACEÆ, 146
    Groundsel,
      Black-tipped, 311
      Silvery, 310
      Western Balsam, 309

               H
    Halerpestes, 91
      Cymbalaria, 103
    Harebell, 274
      Arctic, 273
    Hawk’s-beard,
      Alpine, 280
      Many-flowered, 281
    Hawk-weed,
      Hairy, 282
      Narrow-leaved, 281
      Slender, 282
      White-flowered, 283
    Heal-all, 245
    Heath,
      Family, 211
      White, 215
    Heather,
      False Pink, 216
      False Red, 217
      False White, 216
    Hedysarum, 168
      americanum, 177
      Mackenzii, 178
      sulphurescens, 178
      Mackenzie’s, 178
      Purple, 177
      Yellow, 178
    Helianthus, 285
      Nuttallii, 302
      scaberrimus, 301
    Heliotrope, Wild, 272
    Hellebore, American White, 37
    Hemieva, 130
      ranunculifolia, 136
    Hemlock,
      Mountain, 30
      Western, 29
    Heracleum, 201
      lanatum, 204
    Heuchera, 129
      glabra, 134
      ovalifolia, 135
    Hieracium, 276
      albiflorum, 283
      gracile, 282
      Scouleri, 282
      umbellatum, 281
    Homalobus, 168
      aboriginorum, 173
    Honeybloom, 237
    Honeysuckle,
      Douglas, 268
      Family, 264
      Fly, 269
      Involucred, 270
    Horsetail,
      Family, 14
      Field, 15
      Swamp, 16
      Wood, 15
    Huckleberry Family, 221
    HYDROPHYLLACEÆ, 238
    HYPERICACEÆ, 168
    Hypericum Scouleri, 186

               I
    Ibidium, 55
      romanzoffianum, 67
    IRIDACEÆ, 52
    Iris Family, 52

               J
    June-berry, North-western, 166
    Juniper, Alpine, 32
    Juniperus, 24
      prostrata, 33
      siberica, 32

               K
    Kalmia, 212
      microphylla, 218
    Kruhsea, 46, 50
      streptopoides, 50

               L
    Labrador Tea, 220
    Lactuca, 276
      pulchella, 280
    Lady’s Slipper,
      Small White, 55
      Small Yellow, 55
    Lady’s Tresses, 67
    Lappula, 241
      diffusa, 242
      floribunda, 241
      lappula, 242
    Larch, Lyall’s, 26
    Larix, 24
      Lyallii, 26
    Larkspur,
      Blue, 108
      Western, 107
    Lathyrus, 169
      ochroleucus, 181
      palustris, 181
    Laurel, Small-leaved Swamp, 218
    Ledum, 212
      grœnlandicum, 220
    LENTIBULARIACEÆ, 262
    Lepargyræa, 191
      canadensis, 192
    Leptarrhena, 130
      pyrolifolia, 143
    Leptasea, 130
      austromontana, 145
      Van-Bruntiæ, 144
    Leptotænia, 201
      multifida, 202
    Lettuce, Large-flowered Blue, 280
    Ligusticum, 201
      apiifolium, 203
    LILIACEÆ, 41
    Lily Family, 41
      Mountain, 43
      Snow, 44
    Lily-of-the-Valley Family, 45
    Lilium, 42
      montanum, 43
    Limnorchis, 55
      borealis, 66
      dilatatiformis, 64
      fragrans, 66
      viridiflora, 65
    LINACEÆ, 182
    Linnæa, 264
      americana, 266
    Linum Lewisii, 182
    Lithophragma, 129
      parviflora, 131
    Lithospermum, 241
      linearifolium, 243
    Lobelia,
      Brook, 275
      Kalmii strictiflora, 275
    Loco Weed, 174
    Lomatium, 201
      macrocarpum, 201
      triternatum, 202
    Lonicera, 264
      ebractulata, 269
      glaucescens, 268
      involucrata, 270
    Lousewort, White, 260
    Lutkea, 150
      pectinata, 151
      Cut-leaved, 151
    Lychnis,
      apetala, 84
      Nodding, 84
    LYCOPODIACEÆ, 18
    Lycopodium,
      alpinum, 21
      annotinum, 19
      clavatum, 19
      complanatum, 20
      Selago, 18
      sitchensis, 20
    Lysichiton kamtschatcense, 36
    Lysiella, 54
      obtusata, 59

               M
    Madder Family, 263
    Mahonia, Trailing, 110
    Mairania, 212
      alpina, 214
    Maple,
      Family, 185
      Smooth, 185
    Marigold, White Marsh, 104
    Meadow Rue,
      Veiny, 96
      Western, 96
    MELANTHACEÆ, 36
    Mentha, 245
      canadensis, 247
    MENTHACEÆ, 244
    MENYANTHACEÆ, 236
    Menyanthes trifoliata, 236
    Menziesia, 212
      ferruginea, 219
      Smooth, 219
    Micranthes, 130
      Lyallii, 141
      Nelsoniana, 142
      rhomboidea, 140
    Mimulus, 248
      cæspitosus, 255
      Lewisii, 254
      moschatus, 255
    Mint,
      American Wild, 247
      Family, 244
    Mistletoe,
      Dwarf, 73
    Mitella, 129
      nuda, 132
    Mitrewort, 133, 134
    Mœhringia, 82
      lateriflora, 87
    Moneses, 207
      uniflora, 210
    Monkey-Flower,
      Red, 254
      Yellow, 255
    Moon-wort, 1
      Small, 2
    Mountain-ash, Western, 166
    Mountain Lover, 184
    Muscaria, 130
      adscendens, 138
      cæspitosa, 139
    Musk Plant, 255
    Mustard,
      Family, 111
      Hedge, 122
      Tansey, 123
      Treacle, 121
    Myosotis, 241
      alpestris, 243

               N
    Nightshade,
      Smaller Enchanter’s, 197
      Western Enchanter’s, 198

               O
    Oleaster Family, 191
    ONAGRACEÆ, 193
    Onion, 42
    OPHIOGLOSSACEÆ, 1
    Ophrys, 54
      borealis, 61
      convallarioides, 60
      nephrophylla, 60
    ORCHIDACEÆ, 53
    Orchid,
      Family 53
      Fragrant Bog, 66
      Long-bracted, 63
      Purplish-green Bog, 64
      Round-leaved, 58
      Small Green Bog, 65
      Small Northern Bog, 59
      Small White Bog, 66
    Orchis, 54
      rotundifolia, 58
    Orthocarpus, 248
      luteus, 259
      Yellow, 259
    Oxycoccus, 221
      Oxycoccus, 225
    Oxyria, 76
      digyna, 76
    Oxytrope,
      Drooping-fruited, 176
      Inflated, 177
      Mountain, 173
      Showy, 175
      Sticky, 175

               P
    Pachystima myrsinites, 184
    Paint-brush, White Indian, 257
    Painted Cup,
      Bright, 258
      Scarlet, 258
    Painter’s Brush, 256
    PAPAVERACEÆ, 110
    PAPILIONACEÆ, 168
    Parnassia,
      fimbriata, 126
      Kotzebuei, 128
      montanensis, 127
      parviflora, 127
    PARNASSIACEÆ, 126
    Parsley,
      Cut-leaved, 202
      Large-seeded, 201
      Narrow-leaved, 202
      Wild, 203
    Parsnip, Cow, 204
    Pasque-Flower, 94
    Pea Family, 168
    Pearl-wort, Arctic, 87
    Pectiantia, 129
      Breweri, 134
      pentandra, 133
    Pedicularis, 248
      bracteosa, 261
      racemosa, 260
    Pentstemon, 248
      confertus, 250
      fruticosus, 249
      procerus, 251
      pseudohumilis, 251
    Peramium, 54
      Menziesii, 62
      repens, 63
    Petasites, 285
      frigida, 314
      palmata, 312
      sagittata, 313
    Phaca, 168
      americana, 172
    Phacelia, 238
      heterophylla, 239
      sericea, 239
      Mountain, 239
    Phegopteris, 3
      alpestris, 4
      Dryopteris, 5
      Phegopteris, 5
    Phyllodoce, 212
      empetriformis, 217
      glanduliflora, 216
      intermedia, 216
    Physaria, 112
      didymocarpa, 117
    Picea, 24
      albertiana, 31
      Engelmanni, 31
    PINACEÆ, 23
    Pine,
      Black, 25
      Family, 23
      Jack, 25
      Prince’s, 211
      Running, 19
      White-bark, 24
    Pinguicula vulgaris, 262
    Pink Family, 81
    Pinus, 24
      albicaulis, 24
      Murrayana, 25
    Pipsissawa, 211
    Plantain,
      Rattlesnake, 62
      Northern Rattlesnake, 63
    Plum Family, 167
    POLYGONACEÆ, 75
    Polygonum, 76
      viviparum, 78
    POLYPODIACEÆ, 3
    Polystichum, 4
      Lonchitis, 10
    POMACEÆ, 165
    Poplar, Balsam, 68
    Poppy Family, 110
    Populus
      balsamifera, 68
      tremuloides, 69
    PORTULACACEÆ, 80
    Potentilla, 151
      dissecta, 160
      multisecta, 161
      nivea, 160
      uniflora, 161
    Primrose
      Bird’s-eye, 226
      Evening, Family, 193
      Family, 226
      Maccalla’s 227
    Primula, 226
      americana, 226
      Maccalliana, 227
    PRIMULACEÆ, 226
    Prince’s Pine, 211
    Prunella, 244
      vulgaris, 245
    Prunus demissa, 167
    Pseudotsuga, 24
      mucronata, 28
    Pteridium, 3
      aquilinum pubescens, 6
    Puccoon, Narrow-leaved, 243
    Pulsatilla, 91
      hirsutissima, 94
      occidentalis, 95
    Purslane Family, 80
    Pyrola, 207
      asarifolia, 208
      chlorantha, 207
      minor, 209
      secunda, 209
      uliginosa, 208
    PYROLACEÆ, 207

               R
    Ragwort
      Giant, 311
      Western Golden, 308
    RANUNCULACEÆ, 90
    Ranunculus, 91
      alpeophilus, 100
      eremogenes, 99
      Eschscholtzii, 100
      eximeus, 102
      inamœnus, 101
      montanensis, 103
      pedatifidus, 99
      Purshii, 98
      reptans, 98
      saxicola, 101
      Suksdorfii, 102
    Raspberry
      Arctic, 154
      Creeping, 153
      Dwarf, 155
      Wild Red, 156
    Rattlesnake Plantain, 62
      Northern, 63
    Razoumofskya americana, 73
    Rhododendron, White Mountain, 218
    Ribes
      Howellii, 149
      lacustre, 147
      oxyacanthoides, 148
      setosum, 148
    Romanzoffia, 238
      sitchensis, 240
    Roripa, 112
      nasturtium, 124
    Rosa, 150
      Macounii, 165
    ROSACEÆ, 150
    Rose
      Family, 150
      Macoun’s, 165
    RUBIACEÆ, 263
    Rubus, 150
      americanus, 155
      arcticus, 154
      parviflorus, 156
      pedatus, 153
      strigosus, 156
    Rudbeckia, 285
      hirta, 301
    Rumex, 76
      acetosa, 77
      salicifolius, 77
    Rush, Common Scouring, 16

               S
    Sagina, 82
      saginoides, 87
    St. John’s-wort
      Family, 186
      Scouler’s, 186
    SALICACEÆ, 68
    Salmon-berry, 156
    Sambucus, 264
      melanocarpa, 265
      pubens, 264
    Sandalwood Family, 73
    Sandwort
      Alpine, 89
      Blunt-leaved, 87
      Rock, 88
      Vernal, 89
    SANTALACEÆ, 73
    Sarsaparilla, Wild, 199
    Saussurea, 285
      densa, 322
    Saxifraga, 130
      cernua, 138
      rivularis, 137
    SAXIFRAGACEÆ, 128
    Saxifrage
      Alpine, 140
      Alpine Brook, 137
      Common, 145
      Family, 128
      Fleshy, 144
      Golden, 130
      Lyall’s, 141
      Nelson’s, 142
      Nodding Bulbous, 137
      Purple, 146
      Tall, 142
      Tufted, 139
    Scouring Rush, Common, 16
    SCROPHULARIACEÆ, 248
    Scutellaria, 244
      galericulata, 245
    Sedum stenopetalum, 125
    Selaginella
      densa, 23
      selaginoides, 22
      Family, 22
      Low, 22
    SELAGINELLACEÆ, 22
    Self-heal, 245
    Senecio, 285
      canus, 310
      discoideus, 309
      flavovirens, 309
      lugens, 311
      pseudaureus, 308
      triangularis, 311
    Shooting-Star, 231
      Slender, 230
    Sibbaldia, 151
      procumbens, 157
    Sieversia, 151
      ciliata, 163
    Silene, 82
      acaulis, 82
      Lyallii, 83
    Silver-Berry, 191
    Silver-weed, 159
    Sisymbrium, 112
      altissimum, 122
    Sisyrinchium, septentrionalis, 53
    Skullcap, Marsh, 245
    Skunk-Cabbage, Western, 36
    Smelowskia, 112
      calycina, 121
    Snowberry, 267
      Creeping, 224
      Low, 268
    Solidago, 284
      canadensis, 288
      decumbens, 287
      missouriensis, 287
      multiradiata, 286
    Solomon’s Seal,
      False, 47
      Star-flowered, 47
    Sonchus, 276
      arvensis, 279
    Sophia, 112
      intermedia, 123
    Sorbus, 165
      sambucifolia, 166
    Sorrel, Mountain, 76
    Spatularia, 130
      brunoniana, 142
    Spearwort, Creeping, 98
    Speedwell
      Alpine, 253
      Thyme-leaved, 253
    Spiræa, 150
      densiflora, 152
      lucida, 152
      Beech-leaved, 152
      Pink, 152
    Spleenwort, Green, 9
    Spring Beauty, 80
      Small-leaved, 81
    Spruce
      Alberta, 31
      Douglas’s, 28
      Engelmann’s, 31
    Squaw-root, Northern, 309
    Stachys, 245
      palustris, 246
    Staff-tree Family, 184
    Star-flower, Arctic, 230
    Stenanthella, 37
      occidentalis, 39
    Stenanthium, 39
    Stickseed, 242
    Stitchwort
      Glaucous, 86
      Long-stalked, 85
      Northern, 86
    Stone-crop
      Family, 125
      Narrow petaled, 125
    Strawberry, Wild, 158
    Streptopus, 46
      amplexifolius, 48
      curvipes, 49
    Sunflower
      Nuttall’s, 302
      Stiff, 301
    Symphoricarpos, 264
      pauciflorus, 268
      racemosus, 267

               T
    Taraxacum, 276
      montanum, 278
      Taraxacum, 278
    TAXACEÆ, 34
    Taxus brevifolia, 34
    Tellima, 129
      grandiflora, 132
    Tetragonanthus, 232
      deflexus, 235
    Thalictrum, 91
      megacarpum, 96
      occidentalis, 96
    Thistle
      Family, 283
      Milk, 279
      Wavy-leaved, 321
      White, 321
    Thlaspi, 112
      arvense, 117
    Thuja, 24
      plicata, 33
    Tiarella, 129
      unifoliata, 136
    Tofieldia, 37
      intermedia, 40
      occidentalis, 41
      palustris, 40
    Trientalis, 226
      arctica, 230
    Trollius, 91
      albiflorus, 105
    Tsuga, 24
      heterophylla, 29
      Mertensiana, 30
    Twayblade
      Broad-lipped, 60
      Heart-shaped, 60
      Northern, 61
    Twin-flower, 266
    Twisted stalk
      Smaller, 49
      Tall, 48

               V
    Vacciniaceæ, 220
    Vaccinium, 221
      cæspitosum, 221
      erythrococcum, 222
      globulare, 223
      ovalifolium, 222
    Vagnera, 46
      amplexicaulis, 47
      stellata, 48
    Valerian
      Family, 271
      Northern, 271
      Scouler’s, 272
    Valeriana
      Scouleri, 272
      septentrionalis, 271
      sitchensis, 272
    VALERIANACEÆ, 271
    Veratrum, 37
      viride, 37
    Veronica, 248
      americana, 252
      serphyllifolia, 253
      Wormskjoldii, 253
    Vetch
      Alpine Milk, 170
      American, 179
      Arctic Milk, 172
      Ascending Milk, 169
      Cow, 179
      Indian, 173
      Macoun’s 171
      Narrow-leaved American, 180
      Purple Milk, 169
      Slender Milk, 171
    Vetchling,
      Cream-coloured, 181
      Marsh, 181
    Viburnum, 264
      pauciflorium, 266
    Vicia, 169
      americana, 179
      cracca, 179
      linearis, 180
    Viola
      adunca longipes, 190
      canadensis, 190
      cognata, 187
      glabella, 189
      palustris, 188
      sempervirens, 188
    VIOLACEÆ, 187
    Violet
      Canada, 190
      Dog, 190
      Early Blue, 187
      Family, 187
      Low Yellow, 188
      Marsh, 188
      Tall Yellow, 189
    Virgin’s-Bower, Purple, 91
    Vitis-idæa, 221
      Vitis-idæa, 224

               W
    Water-leaf Family, 238
    Whitlow-Grass
      Arctic, 114
      Golden, 115
      Hoary, 116
    Willow-Herb
      Alpine, 196
      Broad-leaved, 194
      Great, 194
      Hornemann’s, 197
      Nodding, 196
      Yellow, 195
    Willow Family, 68
    Wind-flower, 93
    Wintergreen
      Bog, 208
      Family, 207
      Greenish-flowered, 207
      Lesser, 209
      Liver-leaf, 208
      Low, 213
      One-flowered, 210
      One-sided, 209
      Ovate-leaved, 213
    Woodsia, 4
      oregana, 13
      scopulina, 12
      Oregon, 13
      Rocky Mountain, 12
    Wormwood
      Green, 316
      Pasture, 316
    Woundwort Marsh, 246

               Y
    Yarrow, 314
    Yew
      Family, 34
      Western, 34

               Z
    Zizia, 201
      cordata, 203
    Zygadenus, 37
      elegans, 38
      gramineus, 39
      Grass-like, 39
      Tall, 38





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALPINE FLORA OF THE CANADIAN ROCKY MOUNTAINS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The giant sequoia
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The giant sequoia
        An account of the history and characteristics of the big trees of California

Author: Rodney Sydes Ellsworth

Release date: August 2, 2025 [eBook #76616]

Language: English

Original publication: Oakland: J. D. Berger, 1924

Credits: Sean/AB, Robert Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIANT SEQUOIA ***





                           _The_ Giant Sequoia

              AN ACCOUNT OF THE HISTORY AND CHARACTERISTICS
                     OF THE BIG TREES OF CALIFORNIA

                                   BY
                         RODNEY SYDES ELLSWORTH

                   WITH TWELVE FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS

                             [Illustration]

                              J. D. BERGER
                           OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA
                                  1924


                            COPYRIGHT, 1924,
                        BY RODNEY SYDES ELLSWORTH


[Illustration: THE SUN WORSHIPPERS

  Only at sunset does the Sequoia lose its dignity to become a thing
  of beauty

  MARIPOSA GROVE        Photo by H. S. Hoyt]


                           +To My Grandmother+


                    _A living thing,
                    Produced too slowly to decay,
                    Of form and aspect too magnificent
                    To be destroyed._

                                  —+Wordsworth.+




                                PREFACE


That imposing calm which the great Sequoia of the Sierra Nevada exerts
over many came to be individually impressed upon the author during a
summer’s residence in the Mariposa Grove two years ago. Indeed, it
was the persistence of this spell that made him wish to know more
about this noble tree and caused him to inquire into its literary and
scientific associations. These studies at length stimulated another
desire—that of making the gist of the scattered and heterogeneous mass
of material, ranging from popular rhapsodies to scientific treatises,
available and accessible to all.

It was likewise the author’s ambition to effect a symmetrical
presentation if possible of both the popular and the scientific aspects
of the subject. Hence, the rhapsodies have been robbed of their purple
and the treatises have been faintly touched with imagination to make
them possess an interest for the general reader. By this it must not be
presumed that gravity and fidelity have been neglected. They have been
preserved throughout.

This book has been written primarily for the good of the greatest
number. It is not by a botanist for botanists, but by a tree-lover for
tree-lovers. And if from its pages there emanates, however faintly,
something of the inspiring and enobling presence of the Giant Sequoia,
the author will not have dusted off many an old volume and entertained
himself with an examination of its contents in vain.

The author is greatly indebted to Miss Cristel Hastings for her
untiring aid in the preparation of the manuscript. He also wishes
to extend gratitude to Mr. William T. Amis, who has rendered much
invaluable assistance and counsel. Hearty thanks are due various
Professors of the University of California from whom the author as a
student and friend has received many helpful criticisms and suggestions.

                                             +Rodney Sydes Ellsworth.+

  Berkeley, California,
     April 17, 1924.




                                CONTENTS


                               +Part One+

                    SEQUOIAS OF YESTERDAY AND TODAY

     I—+The Auld Lang Syne of Trees+                                  13

    II—+The Glory of the Mountains of California+                     23


                               +Part Two+

                  GIANT SEQUOIAS OF THE MARIPOSA GROVE

   III—+Galen Clark+                                                  35

    IV—+Wonder Trees+                                                 59

     V—+Oldest of Living Things+                                      89

    VI—+The Eternal Tree+                                            102

   VII—+A Blossom of Decadence+                                      115


                              +Part Three+

                         NAMING OF THE SEQUOIA

  VIII—+A Name for the Ages+                                         127

    IX—+Sequoyah+                                                    134

  +Bibliography+                                                     159




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  The Sun Worshippers                                       Frontispiece

  In the Court of the Giants                                          24

  Galen Clark                                                         40

  Galen Clark Tree                                                    48

  The Cabin                                                           64

  Telescope Tree                                                      72

  Wawona Tree                                                         80

  Fallen Monarch                                                      96

  Grizzly Giant                                                      104

  Alabama Tree                                                       120

  Sequoyah                                                           136

  The Invincible Sequoia                                             144




                                PART ONE

                         Sequoias _of_ Yesterday
                               _and_ Today


                              +Chapter I+

                      THE AULD LANG SYNE OF TREES


The Sequoia is nature’s most magnificent endowment. King of trees,
it has no rival in size the world over, nor is it approached among
living things in age. Noblest of all conifers, it has the grandeur of
granite and the solemnity of marble. Venerable in aspect, it savors of
great antiquity, seeming always to wrap itself in the memories of the
past. So striking, indeed, is this feature of its appearance that the
intellectual traveler often wonders if its race has played a grander
part in the past. Is it a living survivor of an extinct age of monsters?

Time was, and not long ago, when such a question bearing on the
antiquity of the Sequoia would have been lightly considered. Now,
however, mankind is not altogether satisfied with things as they are,
but is mindful of how they came to be so, and the ceaseless searches
of science are unveiling the mysteries of the past. The spade unearths
a coin whose imprint betrays the beliefs or customs, the finish
or crudeness, of an ancient civilization. The discovery of a clay
tablet, the uncovering of a ruined temple or a forgotten tomb, sheds
fresh light upon the history of a people. Bit by bit the evidence
accumulates, and as the vision of the past becomes less dim science is
better able to conjure up before the mental eye the imposing pageants
of a world that has passed away.

Shakespeare calls the world a stage. The allusion, though, is confined
to men and women. But as the scientist views the great earth-drama
that has been enacted throughout the ages he sees a far more extensive
application of this thought. To him “the races of the children of
life” are the players, by reason of the fact that all life has been
superseded by more complex and more highly evolved forms. Indeed, for
millions of years countless multitudes of living creatures have played
their little parts on this earthly stage and have gone their way into
oblivion. The majority have left as little record as the autumn leaves
that drift by the wayside. These are the so-called “lost creations.”
Yet a sufficient number have been preserved for the later instruction
and delight of man. “Everything,” observed Emerson, “in nature tends to
write its own history. The planet and the pebble are attended by their
shadows, the rolling rock leaves its furrows on the mountainside, the
river its channel in the soil, the animal its bone in the stratum, the
fern its modest epitaph in the coal.”

These remains filed away in the archives of nature’s great storehouse
constitute the record of the rocks. And as science reconstructs a
civilization of yesterday from its rude implements, in a similar manner
it interprets the mute meaning of these fossils in the rocks. The dry
bones and empty footprints are given animation and pictured as they
are supposed to have been when alive. Great flying reptiles, called
_pterodactyls_, with an enormous wingspread of twenty-five feet, have
fallen into Miocene seas and have been entombed with the leaves and
muds of their shallow bottoms. Huge reptiles, called _dinosaurs_, have
stalked across the mud-flats of primeval lakes, leaving their broad
footprints in the oozy surface. The tide has come in and gently covered
the impression with a fine sediment and preserved it forever. Further
deposits of sediment have accumulated and the whole become submerged,
until, under constant pressure, they have been compacted into rock and
in the course of time have been raised again to dry land.

The record of the rocks discloses the fact that the Sequoia flourished
on the earth when these dragons of old time and their weird kin
inhabited it. Its forests extended over three continents and it blessed
with its shade these creatures more strange and huge than the earth
has since borne. Under its high, arching columns _dinosaurs_ took toll
of all that could be conquered. Within sight of its imposing forests
others, equally formidable, wallowed in shallow seas, while overhead
soared _pterodactyls_, neither bats nor birds, but giant lizards that
had acquired the power of flight.

This was millions of years ago. It was during the middle period of
life, or, what geologists term the Miocene. It was before the advent
of fur and feathers—aeons, almost, before man’s coming. In point
of time the antiquity of all living things on earth today is of a
recent yesterday when compared to the antiquity of the Sequoia. The
frail tenure of human works is as but a thousand years amid eternity;
nothing; a mockery.

The pick of the fossil hunter has unearthed fossil remains of Sequoia
leaves and cones in strata as early as the _Triassic_. This period
represents the morning of reptilian life and is the first of three
great ages of the Miocene. At its advent moving life had already safely
crossed the border-line of its dependence on water for existence and
had succeeded, slowly and laboriously, in invading dry land. Hence, the
Sequoia as a race has a claim to almost fabulous antiquity.

Memorials of the Sequoia’s ancestry are more abundant in the rocks
of the two succeeding periods of the Miocene, the _Jurassic_ and the
_Cretaceous_. Under the lava flows of Mt. Shasta imprints of its leaves
and cones are found. This is indubitable evidence that the Sequoia
existed in California at that time. Fossil remains have also been found
in localities ranging from “France and Hungary to Spitzbergen and from
Greenland to Oregon and Nebraska.” These stratified remains offer
positive proof that the Sequoia was a great genus covering the entire
Northern Hemisphere and that the now desolate Arctic regions, which
were then warm, were luxuriant with many of its species. In short, the
Sequoia was one of the chief garments of the earth’s vegetation during
Miocene times. Its forests must have been the most imposing the earth
has ever known. Truly, they were the forests primeval.

It is not a little remarkable that the Sequoia was in existence even
before the very mountains which are enobled today by its presence. The
vagaries of mutability have been such that it was actually present on
earth during the genesis of the Sierra Nevada and saw this range lifted
to its place in the sun. Indeed, the eternality of the hills is a
misnomer, for mountains have their birth and their youth, their old age
and their obliteration. Like successions of living forms they have had
their entrance and exit on this terrestrial stage.

During the early period of the Miocene, that country which lay between
the Rockies and the Pacific was a flat plain of low relief, with
meandering streams and vague divides. Occasional rounded hills broke
the monotony of this plain. These were but the abraded stumps of a
pre-existing mountain mass—the ruins of mountains that had been. About
_Jurassic_ time a general disturbance occurred in the present region
of the Sierra Nevada. This was accompanied by an intrusion of a vast
body of molten rock which, when solidified, became the granite of the
Sierra. During the _Cretaceous_ the entire region between the Rockies
and the Pacific again awoke and began to bulge at slow and intermittent
intervals. The Sierra block had its origin during one of these
upheavals and acquired a slight westward slant.

During the age that gave man to the world, the Sierra was uplifted to
the light. About the dawn of the _Quaternary_, the last of the great
divisions of geological time, the greatest manifestation of Sierra
mountain building took place. This convulsion of the earth hoisted the
snowy range to its present sublime elevation.

Following this upheaval came an age of ice. It is to this period that
Yosemite Valley owes its glaciation. In fact, the present indefinable
charm and fierce grandeur of the High Sierra are legacies of this reign
of ice. However, the glaciation of the Sierra must not be correlated
with the continental glaciations which ushered in the age succeeding
the Miocene. The former glaciation is “more properly to be regarded as
corresponding to the very last episode of that long and varied chapter
in the geological history of the continent,” states Lawson. Though
the final uplift of the Sierra block is a long time past as years go,
geologically speaking it is not remote. Indeed, the Sierra Nevada might
“safely be placed among the young and giddy mountains of our planet.”
From the comparative point of view, on the other hand, the waste of
years that have elapsed since the Sequoia first waved its magnificent
evergreen dome toward the heavens is bewildering.

Impressive as the evolution of the Sierra must have been, few of the
dramas of the earth which science has restored are more wonderful
than the restriction of the Sequoia exclusively to the mountains of
California. The record of the rocks following the great Age of Reptiles
tells quite a different story. With amazing abruptness all the rich
diversity of reptilian life apparently ceased. Some change seems to
have occurred, blotting it out forever, for not a scrap of evidence
remains of its continued existence. The _dinosaurs_ are no more; the
_pterodactyls_ have vanished. A new type of life, that of the mammal,
now holds dominion over the earth. Most astounding of all, the Sequoia
still carries on, even to the present day—living survivor of the Age of
Reptiles.

Authorities are not agreed concerning the causes that led to the
extinction of the reptiles. Science still ponders over the mystery. A
feature so extraordinary seems to demand an unusual explanation. Causes
of a violent cataclysmic nature are advanced as valid interpretations.
Yet science refuses to take cognizance of universal calamities and
considers them as apocryphal because they are too unnatural. Climatic
conditions, in the main, are probably responsible, for it is upon
climate that the wealth or poverty of life on the globe depends. That
which was a land of comfort, of abundant food, and of continual summer
may have become, through a process of alternate haste and deliberation,
a land of long winters, of bitterness and hardship. The good days
of the world were exchanged for hard times, and those who could
not survive were gathered to their forefathers. This, together with
volcanic eruptions which took place on a stupendous scale, followed by
glaciations of continental extent, apparently conspired in the ultimate
undoing of reptilian life. These causes, in all likelihood, are
responsible also for the shrinking of the majestic Sequoian woodlands
to a mere fragment of their ancient, vast extent.

About the end of the Miocene the earth became intensely active. In
its agitation some of its seething interior was exuded to the surface
in a deluge of lava. At the same time fountains of molten rocks shot
up from volcanoes, causing the heavens to rain fire about them, and
sifting ashes afar over the earth. Rivers and lakes floated up in
immense clouds of steam over which the blazing beacons suffused weird
colorings—lights and shades of an inferno that not even the pen of a
Dante would have the temerity to attempt to describe. A land of beauty
had become filled with forms of the gloomiest and ghostliest grandeur.
The great _dinosaurs_ looked with disquietude upon it all. Unable, by
reason of their cumbersomeness, to migrate to a gentler clime, they
stoically awaited their doom. The _pterodactyls_, terrified, fluttered
to the ground, flapping their great useless wings as the unearthly
flashes from the heavens fell upon them. The noble Sequoias, even
more impotent to make a retreat, held their ground until set afire or
enveloped in floods of molten lava. At length, having exhausted its
fury, this agent of wholesale ruin ceased as if stricken lifeless in
the midst of its maddest rioting, and the land became a far-stretching
waste out of which life had apparently gone forever.

The unknown complex of causes which brought about the ice age that
followed probably completed extermination of the reptiles, and
it certainly brought the Sequoia, as a race, perilously near to
extinction. The temperature became too cold for life adapted to the
warm conditions of the Miocene age. As a result, reptilian life paled
and declined, until finally its feeble flame flickered out entirely
with the arrival of the glacial epoch. The vast amount of water that
had been vaporized during the volcanic eruptions returned to the earth
in the form of snow. This accumulated in such enormous quantities that
continents came to be white worlds where the vacant sky communed only
with the silent ice. Pulseless and cold, these vast continental ice
caps were as eloquent of death as were the fiery lava flows. Uncharted,
trackless seas of ice they were, with all traces of earthly travail
buried far beneath them. And a terrible solitude was the lord of this
universe.

The scientific world is equally perplexed regarding the mysterious
chain of events that again caused the amelioration of climate. At
any rate, the warmth of summer gradually overtook the snows of
winter, and the ice wasted away. Like morning mist it vanished in
the sunshine. Lakes filled the yawning throats of volcanoes. Light
and beauty replaced ashes and death. Life, too, ebbed back from the
southland and conquered the desolation, filling the vacant world with
a glorious animation. But it was a different type of life that came.
Mammals instead of reptiles now held undisputed dominion. Of all the
rich diversity of life that flourished before the advent of the ordeal
of volcanic fire and the chilling empire of ice, apparently only the
Sequoia escaped utter destruction.

It is this singular survival that prompted John Muir to write of the
Sequoia as a “tree which the friendly pines and firs seem to know
nothing about. Ancient of other days, it keeps you at a distance,
taking no notice of you, speaking only to the winds, thinking only
in the sky, looking as strange in aspect and behavior among the
neighboring trees as would the homely mastadon and hairy elephant among
the bears and deer. It belongs to an ancient stock and has a strange
air of other days about it, a thoroughbred look inherited from the long
ago—the auld lang syne of trees.”




                              +Chapter II+

                THE GLORY OF THE MOUNTAINS OF CALIFORNIA


But two species of the genus Sequoia carry on the noble line in these
feeble times. Scions of a race whose ancestors extend into the depths
of the ages, they seem to be not a part of this puny world. Gigantic in
proportion, they are not unlike uncouth vestiges of another age when
all things were molded on a monstrous scale. Numbering their years by
thousands, they are an “unaccountable oversight” in a world where lives
are limited to the psalmist’s span of years, and where there is no
hope of gaining the length of days of Methuselah and his kin. Indeed,
they appear to be more like mysterious strangers from some far star
than solitary and lonely survivors in the midst of an unfamiliar new
age. Patiently accepting the part of on-lookers, they disdain to take
their place in the active ways of the world and continue to exist for
no apparent reason other than to preserve the pristine glory of their
ancestors lest it die with them and leave the coming years.

Rarest of all tree species, these two survivors are the Giant Sequoia,
or _Sequoia gigantea_, and the Redwood, or _Sequoia sempervirens_. Both
are impressive in the mystery that hangs over their history. But it
is only this that they may be said to have in common. In almost every
other respect they are quite dissimilar. True, the Giant Sequoia is a
grander and more massive edition of the Redwood. However, the former
puts the latter in the shade as to girth, while the latter dwarfs the
former as to height. The Big Tree is unexceeded among trees in girth;
the Redwood probably outstrips all trees of the world in height. Rarely
does the Big Tree lift its towering column of verdure more than 280
feet into the heavens. Yet it attains an amazing trunk diameter of 20
to 27 feet well above its immense swollen base. The Redwood seldom
produces a trunk more than 15 feet in diameter and the average of the
larger trees range from 8 to 12 feet. Trees 280 feet high are not
altogether uncommon. Some even wave their evergreen crowns 340 dizzy
feet above the ground—truly a prodigious altitude for living shafts of
wood to attain.

The Big Tree keeps its youth longer than any known tree and for this
reason is acclaimed the oldest living thing. Frequently it reaches as
great an age as 2,500 years. A few Giant Sequoias are known to have
passed their three thousandth year. Seemingly, this figure fails to
convey a satisfactory comprehension of the magnitude of such a great
age to the minds of popular writers. As a consequence, the age of this
grand tree has suffered unpardonable padding. Nevertheless, such
estimates are not conclusive and rest only on the speculative notions
of fanciful writers. The Redwood, on the other hand, while quite
noteworthy in longevity in the tree world, scarcely sees a thousand
summers. It must yield the palm in all honor to its greater cousin
which ranks first in age of all the worthies of the tree kingdom, and,
hence, in the world of living things.

[Illustration: IN THE COURT OF THE GIANTS

  MARIPOSA GROVE        Photo by H. S. Hoyt]

The _Sequoia sempervirens_ is one of the most consummately beautiful
of trees. Its beauty is as rare and undefinable as the blue on the
mountains in the hour of twilight, as startling and lovely as a
flower-clad April, as charming and delightful as the notes of a melody
that the winds bear away. And yet beauty is its least perfection. All
the cheerful gayety, the contented peacefulness, the warm companionship
that are the chief glory of other trees, the Redwood, too, possesses.
It is one of the most lovable and friendly of trees. But there is
nothing rough or common about it, nothing coarse or voluptuous. To know
it is to know something that is genuine. To admire it is to be unable
to look upon it with the cold eye of a judge, but with the reverence of
a worshipper and the veneration of a child.

The _Sequoia gigantea_ is formidable and sombre in aspect and
very often terrible to look upon. Impassive, unapproachable,
uncommunicative, it is the very autocrat of the forest. Godlike in
physiognomy, at times it is impossible to understand. It has a
loftiness of port, a dignity of bearing, a sublimity of energy that
command attention and win their way insensibly into the soul. Its
nature is as hard and flinty as the granite of the mountainside. But
in spite of all this highmightiness there is something forlorn and
pathetic, something sad and benign about it. All who know the pathos
in memories of days that are accomplished and faces that have vanished
will realize how replete this tree is with sadness and tenderness.
Grand though it is in the religious solemnity and silence that rest
upon it there is something pathetic about its very loneliness that
resembles sadness as mist resembles the rain. Assuredly, if the
_Sequoia sempervirens_ is the most lively and cheerful of trees, the
_Sequoia gigantea_ is the saddest and the grandest.

If the Redwood be considered Grecian in its glory, the Giant Sequoia is
Roman in its grandeur. Both produce forests of giants. In one beauty
and grace held splendid court; in the other greatness and magnificence.
The one is Grecian in its idealism, so divine in its loftiness as
to exert an elevating and ennobling influence, and so fine in its
perfection of form as to epitomize this immortal quality of Athenian
genius; the other is Roman in its invincible strength, so imposing
in its stolidity and massiveness as to embarrass its beholders, and
so baffling in its superiority as to thrill them with awe and fill
them with wonder. One is an emblem of eternal youth, ever sprouting
Phoenix-like from its ruins and pressing with youthful vigor upon the
faltering footsteps of its mouldering sires, exempt, like the immortal
influence of Greece, from mutability and decay; the other is an emblem
of permanence, a form of endurance standing among the temporary shapes
of time, a structure not unlike a Roman pile, built to withstand the
onslaught of the ages.

Today both species of Sequoia are confined to the mountains of
California. They inhabit the western slopes of its two systems of
mountains, the Coast Range on the West and the Sierra Nevada on the
East. The former parallels the ocean; the latter forms the backbone
of the State. Enclosed between these mountain chains lies the great
valley of California—a vast, oval plain, scarred all over with grain
fields and orchards, and mottled with shadows from the drifting sky
squadrons—with its two central rivers, the Sacramento and the San
Joaquin, meeting in its center and flowing with tranquil deliberation
through a series of bays, on through the Golden Gate to the Pacific.

In comparison with the vast distribution of the genus during Miocene
times these two surviving species now occupy a mere fragment of
territory. The Redwood is restricted solely to the coastal mountains;
the Big Tree obtains only in the Sierras. Together, by reason of the
lofty height of the coast species and the gigantic girth of the Sierra
species, they comprise a group of conifers unrivaled the world over.
Since they are found nowhere else, California rightfully merits John
Muir’s claim of being the “Paradise of Conifers.”

The _Sequoia sempervirens_ forms a tolerably uninterrupted belt along
the seaward side of the Coast Range. This belt is approximately 450
miles long and extends from just beyond the northern California
border-line, where it fades out noticeably, south to the bay of
Monterey. The maximum width of the Redwood belt is thirty miles and
reaches from nearly sea level to an altitude of 3,000 feet. In the
vicinity of Crescent City the Redwood approaches the ocean so closely
that its tiny cones scatter their minute seeds about the cliffs upon
which the wild waves of the Pacific beat. In the hot interior valleys
that lie parched and shimmering under summer suns—valleys that are
moistened only occasionally by winter rains, conditions are apparently
too unfavorable to permit of its growth, and the tree is absent. It
thrives only where the fog-laden atmosphere hovers about its crown.
Its feathery arms seem to drink in these hazy, lazy mists as if by
magic and to precipitate them into gentle showers. Along the river
flats frequented by sea fogs, where the soil and environment are
ideal, it attains its greatest development. Indeed, on the bottom
lands of the Smith River and the main fork of the Eel in Humboldt and
Del Norte Counties, the Redwood “completely monopolizes the soil and
forms virgin forests of the heaviest stands of timber in the world.”
“Stands,” according to Jepson in his monumental _Silva of California_,
“of 125 to 150 thousand feet, board measure, to the acre are not
uncommon. Instances of even two and one-half million board feet to the
acre are on record, while 480 thousand feet, not including waste, have
been taken out of a single tree.” When it is realized that good eastern
forests produce but ten thousand board feet to the acre, this statement
is striking. In fact, such an immense yield separates the Redwood from
all the timber trees of the globe.

The _Sequoia gigantea_ is more limited in its range than its fog-loving
cousin. Its belt is but 250 miles long and extends from the middle of
the American River, near Lake Tahoe, to Deer Creek in Tulare County.
It is found in the verdant center of the coniferous belt along the
middle heights of the Sierra. This zone of finest vegetation is located
between the altitudes of 4,600 to 8,000 feet above the sea where the
environment insures the most nearly perfect conditions for tree life;
where heat is tempered by elevation and the cold of winter is modified
by the proximity of a great sunlit valley. The area covered by the
Big Tree, however, fails to equal a hundredth part of that which the
Redwood occupies. This is due to the fact that the Giant Sequoia does
not occur in an uninterrupted belt. Unlike the Redwood, generally
speaking, it congregates in groves. Single trees are rarely found
alone in solitary grandeur. Preferring the society of its fellows, the
Big Tree is almost always found in “family clusters.” Though mingling
with Sugar and Yellow Pine, with White Fir and Incense Cedar, these
Sequoian groves never lose their identity. The size of the individual
Sequoias and their concentration within a definite area are sufficient
to set them conspicuously apart from the general forest.

Twenty-six of these scattered patches of forest giants sociably growing
with trees of shorter pedigree and lesser dignity have been enumerated
by Jepson. These groves logically form a northern and a southern group,
with the Kings River as the line of division. The northern portion
of the Giant Sequoia belt has so diminished in size that it consists
of but seven small groves so widely separated that three of the gaps
between them are from thirty to forty miles in width. The northernmost
group must be called a “grove” by courtesy, since it contains but
six trees half of which are less than three feet in diameter. The
southernmost, with the exception of the Fresno Grove, is the most
remarkable of the northern group. This is the famous Mariposa Grove. In
all these northern patches, the Sequoia is an epicure of climate and
site. It grows only in locally favored or protected spots where the
sunshine is abundant and the soil rich, deep, and moist.

The southern groves mark an almost continuous line through the
majestic, trackless forests of pine and fir from the Kings River
southward to Deer Creek. The gaps in the belt gradually become
increasingly narrow, and then cease altogether. The Sequoia may be said
to extend across the wide basin of the Kaweah and Tule Rivers in noble
forests broken only by deep, yawning canyons with rivers threading
their sinuous way down the center of each. Here, too, the belt widens
out, extending from the granite promontories overlooking the fading
line of tawny foothills to within sight of the summit peaks—regions
of rock and ice lifted above the limit of life. The largest and most
famous of these forests is the Giant Forest located near the mouth of
the Marble Fork of the Kaweah River and within the confines of the
Sequoia National Park. This most wonderful of all American forests was
named by John Muir, who must have wept for joy when he stumbled upon
it. Thousands of trees are congregated in this forest, five thousand of
which are said to be veritable titans in size. It possesses, also, the
largest tree in the world, the General Sherman, which has a diameter of
36.5 feet and a height of 280 feet—measurements which easily entitle it
to wear the purple of the King of all trees.

In this glorious forest the Sequoia is indifferent alike to exposure
and soil, and is found growing in profusion on slopes of every
character, some even clinging to life on bare granite surfaces in a
way wonderful to behold. Multitudes of tender seedlings are continually
springing up in moist, sunny openings to carry on the royal line, and
companies of slender saplings are eagerly crowding up every slope
deserted by their elders, crowning all save the highest eminences.
In fact, the marvelous bounty of Nature has produced here the finest
assemblage of conifers known to botanical science. The entire region is
a billowy sea of evergreens, sinking and rising with the undulations
of the land with an unfailing luxuriance, the great rounded domes of
the giants swelling above the verdant canopy of pines and firs to mark
where the Sequoias sweep along the ridges, rise out of deep canyons, or
encamp on sunny meadows in conclave grand and solemn.




                                PART TWO

                         Giant Sequoias _of the_
                             Mariposa Grove


                             +Chapter III+

                              GALEN CLARK


The Giant Sequoia must have afforded pride and pleasure to the Creator
for it is the finest tree He ever made. Of a truth, there is not in all
the world a tree more wonderful.

And yet, man has flouted this “shade of His perfection.” Under its
shadow he has neglected to gain inspiration and strength. In the
restless trend of the times he has become engrossed in empty pleasures.
In the agitation and strife for wealth individual interests, and not
those of posterity, have become of moment. As a result only that
which offers the allurement of gain has been recognized in the great
Sequoia. Its solemn and stately forests have been invaded by the axe
and commercialism has turned reverence, not into beams and pillars for
places of worship, but into supports for grape vines and barbed wire.

Fortunately, the Mariposa Grove has escaped the fate which the axe
has brought many of its brethren. Like the groves of yore that were
God’s first temples it still stands, a virgin forest. The fluted
columns of its mighty trees are softened by the touch of centuries,
and so harmoniously are these venerable columns disposed that splendid
colonades are formed, giving the effect of a vast, many-pillared hall.
The airy masses of foliage that these great trunks mingle high in the
heavens form cathedral-like archways of the finest forest ceilings
imaginable. These magnificent interlaced archways soften the glare of
day and impart a dim religious light which suffuse shifting mosaics
of light and shade over the forest floor. Even the thick layers of
crumbling bark and the dessicated dust of ages serve to deaden the
footfall of the wanderer and to invest the gloom with a profound
silence. A deep Sabbath-like calm broods in the very air. Indeed, all
seems eloquent of worship. Here Nature stands with arms uplifted.

None escape the sacred influence of such a grove. None, save possibly
the white man. Deer with eyes of soft innocence trip timorously through
it; burly brown bear never shuffle heedlessly down its winding aisles;
and rarely does the noisy, impudent jay muster sufficient courage to
disturb its serenity. The Indian with his stone axe never harmed it,
nor has the myth that he lighted his fires against its trunks, thus
“wantonly destroying that which he was too rude to reverence,” been
substantiated. It is only civilized man who violates such a sanctuary
“just so long,” as John Muir so pithily expressed it, “as fun or a
dollar can be gotten out of them.”

Truly, the ways of man are at times past understanding. Under roofs
that his frail hands have raised he worships, yet he destroys with
utter disregard a Sequoian grove—a temple not made with human hands.
Such acts may be damaging. They may even be bad. But they are
manifestations of human nature—of the clay as it came from the hands
of the Potter. Happily, there are those among men who are of more than
common clay. Such a man was Galen Clark. It was he who first made known
to the world the Mariposa Grove and who faithfully guarded it for well
nigh a quarter of a century. He, above all others, rendered it the most
completely free from the axe and preserved it in the condition in which
his eyes first beheld it. Lest man forget, he saved it as a place of
play and prayer.

Galen Clark came to California in the days of the gold boom. Strictly
speaking, he was not of the Argonauts of ’49, since he was not seized
by the spell of the gold fever until 1853. Shaking the dust of New
York from his feet in October of that year, he joined the eager
multitudes who flocked toward the new El Dorado. The year 1854 found
him in the country of Mariposa taking part in the pick and shovel storm
that was then raging on its mountains. Not unlike the majority, he
failed to find “a chartless river running on fabled sands of gold.”
The chase of the fabulous ended; he took up the less fascinating but
more substantial occupation of a surveyor. Occasionally, however, the
gold lure again possessed him and he spasmodically returned to mining
with the flare-up of local bonanzas. It was while so engaged that he
contracted, through exposure and hardships that had already filled
the nooks of the gold region with the bones of strong men, a disease
of the lungs. The physicians, unable to lessen the great number of
hemorrhages, prophesied that he had not long to live. Now a member
of the dreary brotherhood of failures, health and strength gone, and
knowing that death would claim him soon, he did not become a dissolute
miner. Instead of finding a refuge in strong drink, he sought solace
through communion with the sweet wonders of the common earth and sky.
In truth, he went home to Mother Nature, and became a wanderer finding
peace on mountain tops and consolation in piney woods.

Singularly enough, his lungs healed. The climate had accomplished the
miracle. The bland and salubrious air rendered pungent by the balsamic
odor of Sierran forests, together with an abundance of health-giving
exercise, had cured the disease. More strange still, Galen Clark
attained the venerable age of ninety-six. Though he continued to lead
the life of a mountaineer, and constantly to expose his person to calm
and storm alike, he never suffered a recurrence of the malady.

It was during one of his mountain rambles that Galen Clark came upon
the Mariposa Grove in May of 1857. Having toiled up the slope of a
divide with the South Fork of the Merced flashing in its ravine far
below, he paused at the summit for rest. Upon gazing around, to his
amazement he was greeted by an immense tree. He immediately recognized
it as of the same variety and genus as the mammoth trees of Calaveras
which had so astounded the world subsequent to their discovery in 1852,
and which were, supposedly, the only trees of their kind in existence.
A cairn today marks the spot where Galen Clark caught his first glimpse
of the Sequoia, and this first majestic shaft upon which his eyes
rested in wonderment bears his name carved on a slab of granite hardly
more enduring than the tree itself.

Though not alone in this discovery, it is quite certain that Galen
Clark was the first white man to thoroughly explore the Mariposa Grove
and to make it known to the public. According to his own testimony he
was accompanied by one Milton Mann. “A few days later I was in the
lower portion of the Grove,” writes the discoverer in Foley’s _Guide
Book_, “and since the Grove was situated in Mariposa County, I named
it the Mariposa Grove of Big Trees.” It is not certain, on the other
hand, that Galen Clark and his companion were the first white men to
walk through the Mariposa Grove. The dauntless prospector, undoubtedly,
had also traversed this region. In his search for the imprisoned metal
that seemed to cry out to him for liberation all of this hitherto
unbroken solitude had become familiar ground to his feet. But if
any gold-seekers beheld the Mariposa giants earlier than 1857, the
discovery died with them.

It is sometimes claimed that one R. Hogg, a hunter employed by a
water company to keep its camp supplied with venison and bear meat,
discovered the Mariposa Grove in 1855. While in the pursuit of his
calling, he came upon three trees of a different nature from any others
in the forest. This he reported to Galen Clark and other acquaintances.
Later, in the summer of 1857, and following the discovery of the
Mariposa Grove, Galen Clark came upon the three trees reported by Hogg
in a gulch about one-half mile southeast of the Big Tree grove. The
largest of these stragglers, to which Hogg accredited a circumference
of more than ninety feet, was so badly burned by a forest fire in
1864 that it was afterwards blown down during a storm. The other two
eventually fell victims to the axe.

In April of his forty-third year (1857) Galen Clark settled on the
South Fork of the Merced. He had visited Yosemite in 1855. Therefore,
it was not without foresight that he staked out his claim beside the
trail running from Mariposa to Yosemite in the year that the Mann
brothers completed it. He selected a spot near the lovely expanse of
the Wawona meadow which lies in a basin-like depression encircled by
rolling mountains clad in forests of sugar pine that are no more. He
built a crude log cabin, thus making the beginning of the white man’s
Wawona.

[Illustration: GALEN CLARK AT THE AGE OF NINETY-SIX

  Photo by A. C. Pillsbury]

It was not long before his visions of a teeming traffic that would
some day wend its steady way before his door en route to the Yosemite
became a reality. At first small straggling parties came at lengthy
intervals, then larger groups, and finally a steady stream of eager
travelers who desired to see the glories of Yosemite began to pass his
way. His establishment, too, kept pace with the increasing travel. It
varied from canvas and log to tolerably pretentious buildings as the
seasons went by. With the advent of the sixties it was known as Clark’s
Station, and was the heart of activity in this backwoods country.
By this time a trail connected Clark’s with the Mariposa Grove. So
impressed had the discoverer become with the importance of his find
that he had built a good horse trail of four miles in length, thereby
making the wonder trees of the Mariposa Grove more accessible to the
world.

A trip to the Yosemite in these early days involved much of hardship
without reward; much heat and dust and fatigue in the hope of
enjoyment. A ninety-two mile stage ride was necessary before reaching
Mariposa and an additional sixty miles on horseback. The first night
of the horseback journey usually found the traveler at Clark’s, the
second amid the solemn immensity of Yosemite’s granite cliff and domes
at Black’s, the first structure in the Valley pretentious enough to be
styled a hotel. Real enjoyment did not come until Clark’s was reached.
Here the traveler had arrived at the outer edge of the civilized world
and an atmosphere of romance surrounded the rest of the way. Europeans
and New Yorkers were prone to class the trip in the same category as
an expedition to little-known Tibet, and the friends of those who were
determined on making it urged that such adventurers, before they left
draw up their last wills and testaments. Nor is it to be wondered at
that tourists returning from Yosemite after such a journey should
speak vaguely of “obstacles and difficulties overcome and represent
themselves as having a kind of undefinable claim to the character of
heroes.”

Everyone who passed over the Mariposa trail carried away a pleasant
memory of Galen Clark’s quaint wayside inn and long remembered its
proprietor. The generous hospitality that he extended never failed to
win the admiration of his guests. Even celebrities from abroad paid
him tribute whenever they chanced to speak of him in later years, and
always remarked that he had made them feel at home beneath his roof.
The poor as well as the rich held him in esteem. No weary wanderer, no
matter how low his fortune or how humble his pack, was ever turned
away hungry or unrested. All were equally welcome, for he shared his
loaf with Indian and white alike. Indeed, the natives in the country
around loved him for his kind and gracious ways, sought his advice in
council, and called him “Father Clark.”

The early guide books that tell of these incipient days of pilgrimages
to the Yosemite rarely neglect to remark about the evenings spent about
the open campfire of this simple, upright, kindly man. They tell how he
presided over the social converse of the evening, how he narrated many
a mirth-provoking anecdote, freely exchanging wit and wisdom, and all
the while never indulging in boisterous laughter. They allude to those
trifles which memory often cherishes—“the slight intonations of his
voice indicating that something mildly sarcastic or funny was coming.”
Lastly, they usually conclude with a picture of the great sugar pines,
one hundred and fifty and two hundred feet high, solemnly standing
guard, the files of their fellows extending back into the mystic
blackness of the forest, the foremost calmly looking on the happy
scene, their shadowy clusters of needles brightening and glowing in the
flickering firelight.

Yet these noble qualities which Nature had planted in his being with
such munificence unfitted Galen Clark as an inn-keeper. Business was
too foreign to his temperament, and he was too utterly self-forgetful
to win success. His friends multiplied fearfully and wonderfully,
but fortune was unkind to him and led him into debt. So low had his
estate fallen by 1869, when the Mariposa County survey was made, that
he deeded half his Wawona property to one Edwin Moore. A few years
later he borrowed money with which to make extensive improvements.
These proved so unfortunately planned that foreclosure resulted. Again
Galen Clark faced the most discouraging ordeal that can come to man—the
making of a new start in life.

Until the late seventies the Mariposa Grove was accessible only by
foot or horse. The beginning of the seventies witnessed the completion
of the Mariposa road to Clark’s. In 1874 Washburn, Coffman, Chapman
and Company were granted permission to extend the Mariposa road
to Yosemite, with the privilege of collecting a moderate toll as
compensation for its construction. This road, which is now known as
the Wawona Road, reached the Valley in July of 1875. Its completion
was celebrated in Mariposa in the true holiday manner of the early
Californian. Bands and bluster and bunting were the order of the day.
One prominent citizen of the community delivered a flowery oration
and with an air of great electrical effulgence heralded the event
as the dawn of a new era. Indeed, returning travelers from Yosemite
could no longer lay claim to the laurels of heroes, for the journey
was now considerably shorn of its “terrors.” During the spring of
’78 or ’79 the present road from Wawona to and through the Big Trees
was built. The opening through the Wawona Tree in the Grove was made
in one of these years and vehicles began to carry the curious of the
world through this living tree. Clark’s Station was purchased by the
Washburn Company in May of 1875, and with the advent of the eighties
the present-day Wawona had seen its birth. Clark’s had become but a
memory.

Contrary to popular opinion, the quaint Log Cabin which is so redolent
with the breath of the fifties was not built shortly after the
discovery of the Mariposa Grove. It was built much later, too late,
in fact, to pose as “Galen’s Hospice” or to satisfy the lovely legend
that it sheltered from the stormy blast wanderers who found themselves
far from civilized habitation or human succor. Sentiment would fain
preserve this myth. However, truth is firm and in all honor it must
be stated that this cabin was not erected until 1885, and that it has
never given shelter save to curios and their merchants. The report of
the “Commissioners to manage the Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Grove
of Big Trees” of 1886 forever proves how palpably against the weight of
authority this tale is. “Last year,” the report states, “a comfortable
and artistic log cabin was erected at a central point in the Grove
... and ornamented by a shapely, massive chimney with a cavernous
fireplace guarded by the traditional crane and pendant kettle.”

The first curio dealer to occupy the Log Cabin was “Old Cunningham.”
This quaint character made his curios in a hollow tree with the aid
of a jig-saw and tourists prized his wares the more knowing that they
were made on the spot. When his purse was fat “Old Cunningham” would
ride to Wawona to a saloon called the “Snow Plant,” where he was wont
to present the bottle and spin yarns. Hutchings left posterity a
delightful penciling of this old fellow. “The coach generally halts
at a large and deliciously cool spring near the Cabin, where those
who have come to spend the day will probably take lunch. Here, too,
we shall have the pleasure of meeting Mr. S. M. Cunningham, who knows
every tree by heart, its history, size, and name, and can tell you more
about them in ten minutes than any man could in an hour (as is the
usual case with such wags). I can see his bright and genial look, watch
his wiry form and supple movements while I write. There is one thing
especially noticeable about Mr. Cunningham—he is never discouraged
and sees always the bright side of things, so that when a storm is
swaying the tops of the trees until they bend together, he can listen
interestedly and tell you laughable incidents until your sides ache.”

With the waning of the gold excitement and the waxing of a stable
Statehood, those who were laying the foundations of the State began to
turn their faces toward the future. Gradually they came to see the need
of treasuring some of its natural heritages. They recognized the fact
that California had been lavishly favored with great natural wonders.
Nevertheless, they came to realize also that she was not so rich in
these as to be careless or neglectful of their preservation. They
likewise perceived, these far-seeing ones, that although California
possessed all of the Giant Sequoias, they were the most perishable of
all her treasures if left without protection. Destructive humanity can
little change the sublime granite forms of Yosemite. They will always
remain unspoiled, and mankind can hardly mar them more than could the
clouds that hover about their summits or the butterflies that flit
about their bases. It is true that man may plow Yosemite’s meadows
and cut down wildflower gardens that have never known a mower. He can
destroy its clusters of trees, rob Mirror Lake of its reflective charm,
stop the flow of its waterfalls. All this he can do. But however much
he tries he can but little alter or disturb the majestic repose of its
rocks. Yet he can lay low in a single day a Sequoia that waved its
arms to Sierran winds when the Carpenter of Nazareth was born. In one
short season he can reduce a hallowed Sequoian grove to an expanse of
blackened stubble where only charred stumps remain to mark where trees
once stood and “looked at God all day.”

Fortunately, however, these builders of a commonwealth saw the light
in time. Nor did they wink at it. Hence, the Mariposa Grove came to be
made safe from the axe through seasonable legislation and was spared
the fate that soon befell other Sequoian groves at the hands of greed
and commercialism.

Fortunately, again, Galen Clark was appointed Guardian of the Mariposa
Grove by the Governor. The choice was well and wisely made. In fact,
when John Muir said, “Galen Clark is the sincerest tree lover I ever
knew,” he spoke with fine truth and spirit. Never will Yosemite look
again upon the likeness of such a man. In the performance of his duties
as guardian of the Yosemite Grant he was not found wanting and proved
himself sterling by every standard incident to human nature.

In 1864 when kinsmen in their bitterness and hatred were destroying
one another, Senator Conness in behalf of certain influential citizens
of California introduced a bill into Congress and the law-makers of
Washington paused for a moment in the prosecution of the Civil War to
pass the Act which granted to the State that “cleft or gorge in the
Granite Peak of the Sierra Nevada Mountains ... known as the Yosemite
Valley with its branches and spurs, in estimated length fifteen miles
and in average width one mile back from the main edge of the precipice
on each side of the valley ... and the tracts embracing what is
known as the ‘Mariposa Big Tree Grove,’ not to exceed four square
miles....” In addition to this the Act stipulated: “the said State
shall accept this Grant upon the express conditions that the premises
shall be held for public use, resort, and recreation and shall be
inalienable for all time.” President Lincoln approved the Act a few
days before he made his famous speech on the field of the battle that
broke the Southern blade. Shortly after this Governor Low of California
formally issued a proclamation accepting the Grant. In it he warned
all persons against willful and malicious trespassing and made it a
misdemeanor to injure or destroy any of its treasures. In accordance
with the terms of the Act, the Executive of California then appointed
eight Commissioners to manage the Valley and the Big Tree Grove, naming
Galen Clark as one of them. On the second of April, 1866, the State
Legislature made formal and legal acceptance of the Grant and clothed
the Commissioners with the necessary power to make such regulations
as were requisite to its administration and control. At this time the
Legislature also authorized the Governor to appoint a Guardian to take
active charge of the Grove and the Valley. A small appropriation of two
thousand dollars was made for the purpose of making improvements during
the ensuing two years and an annual salary of five hundred dollars was
voted the Guardian.

[Illustration: GALEN CLARK TREE

  Rock cairn to left marks spot of discovery

  MARIPOSA GROVE        Photo by H. S. Hoyt]

Life is not always a picking of flowers; often it is a plowing of
meadows strewn with hidden rocks. The latter proved to be the lot of
the Commissioners in connection with the Yosemite, for their progress
was blocked by the hostility of settlers who refused to relinquish
their claims. Litigation resulted and the Commissioners encountered
only censure and antagonism in their attempts to make of the Yosemite
a playground for the people. Happily, they were not so handicapped
in their management of the Big Tree Grove, yet here, too, they had
difficulties to contend with.

Chiefly among these was the problem of human vandalism. Constant
vigilance was necessary to guard against those who seemed to take an
insatiable delight in destroying all within their reach. Truly, the
besetting sin of all “pilgrims” the world over is their unquenchable
lust for “specimens.” Like priests of the Capuchin Convent who
“unfailingly show some memento of a saint—a bone of his body, a thread
of his garment, a lock of his hair, or a drop of his blood—before they
extol his miracles,” the “pilgrims” who journey to Nature’s shrines
must, at all hazard, carry away some bit of the shrine to awaken the
wonder of the rustics at home. Or, if they are thwarted in this, it
becomes imperative for them to inscribe their poor little names in
some convenient place on the shrine so that all who run may read. What
a pity some justly wrathful Sequoia cannot fall on some of these
defamers and crush their “eyeballs into dust,” thereby intimidating
them and their kind into forever desisting from such acts.

The Commissioners were plagued with vandals of yet another sort—the
camper and the sheep-herder; the one starting forest fires through
negligence, the other purposely to insure better grass for his
“hoofed locusts.” In 1889 the Grove was threatened with disaster.
A fire, started because of a camper’s carelessness or through the
deliberate design of sheep-herders, secured sovereign possession of
the surrounding forest and in one place invaded the Grove itself. In a
few days the entire annual appropriation was used in saving the Grove
from the angry flames. When their fury was finally conquered, black
scars that only time could obliterate remained. It was this memorable
fire that consumed the Lone Giant, the largest decumbent monarch in the
Grove.

Since the Commissioners had no control over outside forests bordering
on the Grove, this calamity indicated the need of building a fireline
to arrest the progress of future conflagrations. The necessity of
clearing the Grove of its dense masses of inflammable undergrowth was
also made apparent. This growth not only obstructed a view of the older
trees, but it rendered them inaccessible for close inspection. It also
made for poor reproduction by depriving seedlings of light. It choked
and starved the younger trees, while it robbed the patriarchs of their
much needed moisture and hindered their growth. Hence, to render these
harmful features negligible, the Commissioners decided to clear the
Grove of its underbrush. The appropriations of the next five years were
used toward this end. By 1895, all the acreage within the ambit of the
Big Tree Grant had been treated to the brush scythe and the grubbing
hoe, and the fire menace reduced to a minimum.

No less worthy of attention are the extensive additions and
improvements made during these years upon the roads. Each of the main
clusters of Sequoias was rendered accessible and travelers could
make a complete tour of the Grove viewing its principal wonder trees
from the stage, as they do today. The State had received the Grant
approachable only by trail. In an amazingly short time, considering
the meagerness of appropriations, the State had rendered the Grove
accessible to other than hardy travelers. Young and old, the physically
fit and the infirm, could now enter it with comfort and safety. In
all fairness it must be conceded that the State had made the Mariposa
Grant more suitable for the particular use for which it had been
appropriated. The Commissioners had administered the Grove for the
good of the greatest number. They had taken positive steps to protect
it from the carelessness of the thoughtless and the wantonness of the
ignorant. Unquestionably, they had proved scrupulously careful in their
administration of the trust imposed in them.

Yet even so commendable an accomplishment as this only aroused a storm
of criticism. The removal of the fire-inviting underbrush shocked
the nerves of sentimentalists who advocated the preservation of the
Mariposa Grove “in the condition in which it won the admiration of
its discoverer and appealed to the enthusiasm of the world.” They
lamented over the fancied catastrophe. They fell into near convulsions
over the thought that the virginal beauty of the Grove was no more,
because its “flowering shrubs” had been grubbed out. Even the _Century
Magazine_ took up the bodeful cry. Joaquin Miller’s statement that he
had travelled from Babylon to Jerusalem “without seeing so much as a
grasshopper, or a bird, or a blade of grass in a land that was once
an Eden” was quoted as a prophecy of the Grove’s condition in the
near future if these “destructive tendencies” continued. Alexander,
they pointed out, mourned because Greek ivy would not grow on the
tower of Babel and inferred that such would be California’s lot when
her eyesight sufficiently improved to see the need of enhancing the
grandeur of her Sequoias by garlands. And all the while they failed to
see the irony of their plea. They did not know that sentiment, like
ivy, can cling to a very flat surface.

Nor is this all that the Commissioners accomplished. To their list of
achievements must be added yet another. In order to make the Grant of
1864 a treasure that “all shall share and none shall be the poorer for
sharing,” they warred against unscrupulous commercial enterprises.
Hawkers continually pressed forward their schemes in honeyed words to
make travelers the victims of innumerable petty charges and vexations.
However, the Commissioners who were all men of high principles would
have none of them. Concessioners who proved unprincipled in their
treatment of tourists were summarily deprived of the means with which
to accrue further ill-gotten gains. In all truthfulness it can be
stated that throughout the entire forty years of State control[1] the
various Commissioners never sullied their hands in graft. Though they
received not a penny in salary and often laid out considerable sums
to swell the meager appropriations of the State Legislature, their
office was never used for the purpose of gain. In short, they carried
a trusteeship that concerned the high honor of the Commonwealth of
California in a manner which justifies the pride of the people.

In all this glorious work Galen Clark, as Guardian, stands head
and shoulders above his colleagues. He had that desire to serve
without its selfish qualities. Not inspired by the love of fame and
reputation, he did not toil for self-aggrandizement, like many men. He
considered the interest of the people higher and purer than that of the
individual. It was this interest that he ever held paramount, that he
always best served. To him the highest patriotism was expressed by the
man who thought not of honor of self or of individual reward, but who
lost himself in the larger and dearer interests of the Commonwealth;
who so loved it for its own sake that he was content to be forgotten.
In this respect Galen Clark succeeded in a manner so striking that it
deserves the name of art, not of artifice. He is practically unknown
today. Yet he rendered the people of California, and even of America, a
singular service.

“As Guardian he enjoyed a longer contact with the management of the
Grant, off and on, than any other single individual. He was reappointed
again and again by succeeding Governors as Guardian, and after
twenty-four years of service in this capacity, he voluntarily retired,
carrying with him the respect and admiration of every member of the
Commission, of all the residents of the Valley, and of every visitor
who enjoyed the pleasure of his personal acquaintance.”

The tribute paid him on his retirement in 1897 by those with whom he
was so long officially associated is worthy of full quotation:

  +Whereas+: Galen Clark has for a long number of years been closely
  identified with Yosemite Valley and has for a considerable portion
  of that time been its Guardian; and

  +Whereas+: He has now, by his own choice and will, relinquished the
  trust confided in him, and retired into private life; and

  +Whereas+: His faithful and eminent services as Guardian, his
  constant efforts to preserve, protect and enhance the beauties of
  Yosemite; his dignified, kindly and courteous demeanor to all who
  have come to see and enjoy its wonders, and his upright and noble
  life, deserve from us a fitting recognition and memorial; now,
  therefore, be it

  +Resolved+: That the cordial assurance of the appreciation by this
  Commission of the efforts and labors of +Galen Clark+, as Guardian
  of Yosemite, in its behalf, be tendered and expressed to him:

  That we recognize in him a faithful, efficient and worthy citizen
  and officer of this Commission, and of the State; that he will be
  followed into his retirement by the sincerest and best wishes of
  this Commission individually, and as a body, for continued long
  life and constant happiness.

Galen Clark did great things, but apparently fame accompanied him to
the grave. Few know of him today. One of the most kindly of men, he had
a simplicity so intense that at times it appeared ridiculous to men of
sense and candor. Never offending by superiority, modesty composed the
very fabric of his being. To be rather than to appear was the ruling
passion of his long life. Having an insuperable aversion for bluster
and bombast, he talked about himself rarely, and then only with the
greatest of reticence. It was only after much persuasion on the part of
friends that he was induced to write his charming and authoritative
account of the _Indians of Yosemite_ in 1904. Doing nothing for the
sake of personal display, he never forced himself into the limelight.
Unobtrusive and unpretentious, he had all that unaffected humility that
some believe to be the essence of Lincoln’s greatness.

No account of Galen Clark would be complete if it failed to touch on
his love of Nature. “He was fond of scenery,” testifies John Muir,
“and once told me that he liked ‘nothing in the world better than to
climb to the top of a high ridge or mountain and look off.’ Oftentimes
he would take his rifle, a few pounds of bacon, a little flour and a
single blanket and go off hunting, for no other reason than to explore
and get acquainted with the most beautiful points of view. On these
trips he was always alone and indulged in the tranquil enjoyment of
Nature to his heart’s content.”

Few, indeed, have been more sincere in their love of Nature. He loved
not only all her moods, both beauteous and terrible, but all her forms
from the lowliest flower in the dust by the roadside to the loftiest of
Yosemite’s cloud-caressed cliffs. But he lacked the power of expressing
his affections. Like Muir, he “read the great book spread out before
him;” unlike Muir, he was not gifted with a magic pen. Probably he was
too sensitive to his poverty of language to attempt to describe the
fairy-like beauty, the rare delicacy, and the wondrous tints of an
Alpine blossom—“that beautiful creature that catches the smile of God
from out the sky and preserves it.”

Twenty summers in the Yosemite formed in Galen Clark an attachment for
the Valley that was deep and lasting. Nearing the sunset of his life,
like the patriarchs of old, he dug his own grave in the little cemetery
near Yosemite Falls. With his hands he hewed his own tombstone from
one of the granite blocks the elements had plucked from the cliff over
which the snowy flood of the grand Yosemite Falls descend sonorous, and
soft, and slow. Taking up a few seedling Sequoias from the Mariposa
Grove, he transplanted them at the four corners of his last resting
place so that they would shade the grave of their blessed benefactor in
the years to come. A man of great age, he must have brooded on death
and become familiar with its mystery so that the end did not come as a
surprise.

One day in 1910, at the age of ninety-six, the end came and in sorrow
and in silence all that was mortal of Galen Clark was laid in the
sacred earth, his kindly soul passing on to where, beyond the booming
voice of the great fall he so loved, there is peace.




                              +Chapter IV+

                              WONDER TREES


The Mariposa Grove belongs in the category of the world’s impressive
wonders. It presents the most remarkable exhibition of the Sequoias
growing between the American and the Kings Rivers and displays Nature’s
finest handiwork on the fraternity of the king of all trees. It
contains the essence of the most imposing qualities of the Sequoia and
is unlike any other grove in its very compactness. Concentrated in its
small extent are trees in every phase of development from nurseries
of tender seedlings obtaining their feeble hold on life and groups of
graceful saplings not half arrived at the maturity of treehood, and
just disclosing their impatience to be kings, to venerable patriarchs
that are numbered foremost in the world of living things—giants
so freighted with age that they exemplify Doctor Johnson’s famous
metaphor, “and panting Time toiled after him in vain.”

The Mariposa Grove is superior to other Sequoian tracts in its
accessibility, lying as it does in a shallow, crater-like depression
near the top of a forested ridge at an elevation of 6,000 feet above
the sea and a distance of sixteen miles as the crow flies from the
Village in Yosemite Valley. This ridge, upon which the Grove is
situated, runs in an easterly direction between Big Creek and the
South Fork of the Merced, having as its culmination Mt. Raymond, a
rocky promontory upon which the snow lingers even in July.

The Grove is approachable over the Wawona Road which winds upward
along the south rim of Yosemite Valley. After passing southward in a
meandering course through twenty-seven miles of Park forest, the road
drops to Wawona from where it again ascends 1,500 feet within eight
miles before reaching the portals of the Mariposa Grove. Once within
the Grove, but a comparatively brief period of time is required in
which to review its salient features. With little effort it may be
completely explored and studied. So harmoniously are its wonder trees
disposed within the utmost smallest space that all of them may be
viewed from a passing vehicle. In fact, even the most cursory journey
through the Mariposa Grove will suffice to give an impression of the
singular, solemn dignity of the Sequoia.

Possibly much of the world-wide fame of this Grove is due to the fact
that it has been brought the nearest to civilization of the several
Big Tree groves. Yet interest in it should not spring merely from such
a consideration, for it lies in happy proximity to the grandeur of
Yosemite’s cliffs and domes. Indeed, it is as distinctive a feature
of Yosemite National Park as the Valley itself. Time was when the
importance of the Mariposa Grove was little if at all recognized. In
the last decades of the nineteenth century the Calaveras Grove held the
center of the stage. The latter was then the most accessible. Because
of this it became the Mecca of naturalists and celebrities of the
day who made pilgrimages across the continent in order to visit it.
Therefore, the Calaveras giants loom large in the earlier literature of
the Sequoia. But with the passing of the stagecoach and the hitching
post—with the coming of the “winged wheels” and the “iron horse,”
the Mariposa Grove ceased to bloom unseen. Instead of the Calaveras
Grove it became the more easily reached. Inevitably the pendulum of
popularity swung toward it and yearly the tide of travel that flows its
way increases.

The tendency to wander into the wilderness that obtains in these
feverish times is advancing the popularity of the Mariposa Grove.
Mankind is coming more and more into sympathetic contact with Nature.
Yearly thousands of over-civilized people are discovering that nothing
so renews the health of the body, so refines the mind, so affords
a margin of leisure for the soul, or so has the power to quiet the
“restless pulse of care” as communion with Nature. They are discovering
that real recreation and enjoyment are not found in crowded cities or
fashion-hampered hotels. As a result, unspoiled woods and mountain
solitudes, brawling brooks and soundless lakes, flowers and stars, rosy
dawns, sunset golds and twilight purples are fast becoming the wealth
of nations. All this is glorious and full of promise. It lends a happy
tone to the times. Truly, if it persists in increasing, the Mariposa
Grove is destined to enjoy a tremendous tomorrow.

The Grant made by Congress in 1864 really embraced two distinct groups
of the Giant Sequoia. Because these approach within but a few yards
of each other, they have come to be looked upon as a single body. The
Upper Grove, according to Whitney, contains 365 trees of a diameter
of one foot and over. This makes, as the old guide books were wont
to point out, “a tree for every day in the year.” The Lower Grove is
smaller in area and contains but 182 trees, which are more scattered
than those of the Upper Grove. In both groves there are hardly
more than 125 Sequoias over 40 feet in circumference, yet these in
themselves are so imposing that to view them is compensation for a
journey half the circuit of the globe.

The road enters the Lower Grove, describing a figure eight in passing
through it and the Upper Grove. The Sergeant of the Guard and the
Four Sentinels guard the gateway. Their bright color and port, rather
than their size, at once attract the eye. Soon other monarchs, among
them the prostrate Father of the Forest, are passed. Then the Grizzly
Giant, standing alone in the grandeur of its own solitude, chains
the attention. Upward wanders the road, passing from one marvel to
another. Each seems to surpass its predecessor, and finally, when
the road passes through the Wawona Tree, it seems the chief wonder
of them all. But when this Highway of the Giants winds back again to
the Log Cabin, the traveller learns that the real wonder has been
reserved for the last. Here he will find himself in the midst of a
most magnificent grouping of Sequoias. Over half a hundred are within
sight of the Cabin. But not until, after examining one after another,
letting the eye roam over their fluted columns and upward into the
blue-green depths of their far-away tops, walking around some and into
the enormous hollows of others, climbing up the sides of still other
prostrate trunks and stepping them off from end to end, will a proper
realization of the immensity of the Sequoia be possible.

The more remarkable trees of the Mariposa Grove have received names
to individualize them. But even this practice of late has been
carried too far. The names of states, cities, and persons have been
indiscriminately tacked to trees that were on earth when the stones
of Rome were laid. That such comparatively trivial and frivolous
designations so inconsistent with the grandeur and nobility of the
Sequoia should be permitted is amazing and regrettable. It detracts
seriously from the finer appreciation of the tree and renders its
groves “freak museums” which are looked upon with a “Barnum eye”
as merely “side-show curiosities and big things.” Assuredly, such a
practice is to be unreservedly condemned.

Whitney attempted to avoid just such a result as this by distinguishing
the greater Sequoias by numerals. However, the undesirability of such a
method is at once apparent when pressed into service. Such featureless
monotony as “Number 15, fine, sound tree; Number 304, largest and
oldest tree in the Grove; Number 262, half-burned at the base,” and the
like (as Whitney recites in his _Yosemite Guide Book_) is produced.
Obviously, the trees must be individualized by names. But why attach
a name such as Andy Johnson to a tree that saw the light of day when
Pompeii was destroyed? Affixing names of such temporary notable
figures of the day to a Sequoia savors almost of ticketing the name
for an “adventitious immortality.” At any rate, whether it be the tree
or the man so honored, probably either would live as long in memory
without the connection. If a Sequoia must be labeled, let some striking
attribute of the tree itself be the governing factor in selecting the
designation.

Foremost of the Sequoias in the Mariposa Grove is the Grizzly Giant.
It is among the most massive-stemmed trees of the world and ranks
with the oldest inhabitants of the earth. Yet a mere statement of
its size little serves to convey an adequate impression of the tree.
Measurements are, after all, only relative criteria, at best. As
well give the tailor’s measurements of Lincoln as an index of his
greatness as to try to convey the fascinating immensity of this tree by
saying that it is 204 feet high and 31 feet in diameter at the ground.
Its stockiness is truly remarkable. Its sturdy trunk tapers upward so
slightly to the first great limb—reputed to be six feet in diameter;
the size of a mature pine—that the diametric variance is almost
imperceptible. Nor is its base excessively expanded. No more, really,
than is necessary for strength. In fact, it seems almost too slight an
expansion to serve as a diagonal brace or instep for the support of
such a gigantic structure upon the earth. Consequently, the diametric
measurement of the Grizzly Giant at the ground justly signifies its
enormous bulk. Yet even this cannot be accurately obtained for its
base has been so badly gnawed by flames that a true measurement is not
possible.

[Illustration: THE CABIN AND ITS MAGNIFICENT SETTING

  MARIPOSA GROVE        Photo by H. S. Hoyt]

Several Sequoias press closely upon the Grizzly Giant in girth. The
Lafayette Tree is easily its counterpart, having a ground diameter of
29.4 feet. But in this case the swell at the base is excessive and
the trunk itself has less than two-thirds the diameter of the Grizzly
Giant. The Columbia Tree even exceeded the Grizzly Giant in girth and
must have measured at least 110 feet in circumference before fire
claimed half its base. Viewed from the Cabin it is extremely imposing
and almost as grand and picturesque in its old age as the Grizzly
Giant. Standing on a steep slope, its stem appears to be fully as
massive as that of the patriarch of the Grove, while its great elbowed
limbs and its high top, “bald with dry antiquity” and scarred with
tokens of old wars, vest it with a venerable charm. However, a scramble
through the dense brush on the up-hill side reveals a large burnt
hollow in which a dozen persons could comfortably stand. If sawed
close to the ground its stump would be shaped like a crescent moon. A
tape stretched around it and across its concave surface would record
a diameter of 25.6 feet. The Washington Tree is a foot less in girth
at the ground than the Grizzly Giant, yet measured 10 feet above the
ground its trunk is a few inches larger in diameter, being 20.7 feet.
Nevertheless, it tapers far more and is not nearly so imposing in its
pillar-like stateliness as the tree that presides over the Mariposa
Grove.

After all, mere figures have their limitations. They are not expressive
of Sequoian size. This may be due to the columnar character of the
Sequoia’s trunk. It rises smooth and unbroken by protuberance of any
kind for a hundred to a hundred and fifty feet. Vastness is so artfully
given emphasis and completeness that the whole is not a monstrosity.
Symmetry is so perfectly achieved that there is no straining for
enormity. What would be a commanding height for a building on a flat
level surface appears not out of the ordinary in the Sequoia. This is
perhaps why a first glimpse of the Sequoia is sometimes disappointing.
Examination and meditation are necessary before the grandeur of the
tree “grows” upon the observer. Then he is filled with a feeling of awe
that no grandeur of architectural pile could possibly inspire.

The Mariposa Grove possesses the tallest of the Sierra Sequoias, the
Mark Twain Tree. This magnificent specimen lifts its proud head 331
feet into the sky. Thus, it would reach nearly two-thirds of the
way up the lofty Washington Monument and would over-top the dome of
the Nation’s Capitol. Yet those who gaze upon it for the first time
depart doubting. Seeing is not believing. Its appearance is anything
but that of the tallest Giant Sequoia on the globe. Nevertheless, the
measurement is accurate and authentic and must stand.[2]

Other Sequoias rank close seconds to the Mark Twain Tree in height. The
Captain A. E. Wood, with a height of 310 feet, is not far behind. The
Columbia, 294 feet high, the Nevada, 287 feet, and the Georgia, 270
feet, are all exceptional trees. In fact, a score of others could be
enumerated before the imperial Queen of the Forest would be reached,
whose 219 feet of trunkage place it within the average height of the
Giant Sequoia.

Most perfectly formed of the Sequoias of the Grove is the Alabama
Tree. The pioneers called it the “Pillar of the Temple.” It has
developed under full sunlight and is magnificently balanced in all
its proportions. Truly, it is one of the finest examples of “Nature’s
forest masterpieces,” as John Muir was wont to designate the Sequoia.
Fit to support any temple, it stands marvelously perfect, unmarred
by fire, untouched by disease, undisturbed by the violence of the
elements. Centuries have passed over it, centuries that have noted many
disasters in the march of civilization, and yet it has remained free
from accident. Its heroic stem is as roundly perfect and as regularly
tapered as though turned in a lathe. Unbroken by a limb upwards of
nearly two hundred feet, with an instep that adjusts itself to the
mass it supports with elegant finish, it discloses a trunk with deeply
and widely furrowed ridges not unlike a pillar that Phidias might
have fashioned. But no pillar ever conceived by man bore a tint more
ravishing or a luster more superb than this. When spotted with shifting
patches of golden sunlight, its cinnamon-reddish trunk would put to
shame the richest colorings of Numidian marble.

Nor has any pillar of stone ever supported a more exquisite structure
than the crown of this Sequoia. Possessed of almost an artificial
finish, it is a gracefully trimmed, singularly perfect dome. The
supports of this crown leave the trunk in a woody wilderness of huge
arms, wild in ungovernable expression, knotted and confused as those of
giants who toss their arms in anguish. These great limbs, regal-hued
in rose and purple, dissolve themselves abruptly into masses of stumpy
branchlets which in turn spray out into a soft film of deep blue-green
foliage. Indeed, it is impossible to distinguish against the skyline
exactly where this arch described by the foliage ends and where sky
begins. So subtile are the edges of this crown that they appear to melt
away into the heavens. Yet more wonderful is the flame-like semi-halo
visible along the crest of this tree just after a rain. Ruskin noticed
this light on pine trees. “The whole outer crown,” he states, “becomes
a thing of light, dazzling as the sun itself, for every minutest needle
is bedewed and carries a diamond, as if living among the clouds it had
caught a part of their glory.”

Never has Nature presented a more striking contrast, a more
extraordinary comparison than in the trunk and foliage of the Sequoia.
They are at the opposite ends of the scale. One presents the utmost
massiveness of outline; the other the most delicate curvature and
grace. The trunk has qualities of permanence, classic mightiness,
enduring power, and the colossal dimensions that go with two thousand
years of age; the foliage possesses qualities of fleetness, ephemeral
frailty, fragile beauty, and the airy nothingness of a dream.

Nearly all the other Sequoias of the Grove have had their perfection
marred by three agents of destruction—time, fire, and man. The
remarkable manner in which they have triumphed over their destroyers
makes them unique among trees. Seared, scarred, and mutilated all
their lives, they have carried on in their great, patient, rugged
fashion. Accidents seem unable to disturb more than momentarily their
peaceful way. Calamities that would vanquish other trees only serve
to quicken their hardy, tenacious growth. Almost invincible, they
appear to know neither despair nor defeat. Even when overthrown by the
combined strength of the elements of heaven and earth, though uprooted
and prostrate, they refuse to perish utterly. Would that man had the
stamina of the Sequoia.

Time has not laid a heavy hand on the Sequoia. On all living things it
leaves its trace. But never within the compass of human reckoning has
time alone been able to take off a Sequoia. Fire must first prepare the
way by eating through the center of gravity of its trunk. Then, and
only then, are the tempests able to overthrow it. This is because the
scanty foliage of the tree never makes for top-heaviness. One of the
most interesting habits of the Sequoia is the pruning of its own top.
Unnecessary limbs are rarely retained. Not infrequently in Sequoian
groves when there is neither wind nor other apparent cause, a crash in
the night is heard and at dawn the ruins of a limb are found beneath
one of the Giants. Evidently the Sequoia knows that a tree which
carries its crown two hundred and fifty feet above its base cannot
wrestle with the fury of the winds under full sail. Consequently, it is
only after fire has deflected one of these columns from its plumbline
and when the mass of earth about its roots has been softened by rain or
snow, that the gales succeed in prostrating the Sequoia.

The Fallen Monarch and the Fallen Giant are the two most noted of this
category in the Mariposa Grove. The former, when standing in the full
glory of prime, must have been the equal of the largest of the lordly
monarchs of today. Its bark gone, its sap-wood decayed, its base badly
fire-scarred, it still measures over 85 feet in circumference. But
for all its great size, its refusal to perish is even more wonderful.
It is not a mouldering mass which tourists can idly kick about, but a
solid trunk whose wood is as firm and sound as on the day the tree fell
to earth. How long the bleached ruin of a tree may have lain on the
forest floor is mere conjecture. How old this monarch was before its
fall is an equally fascinating speculation. It may be that the circling
sun looked down upon it as a graceful sapling when Cheops raised
the Pyramids on the plains of Gizeh. Nor are these vast, unmeaning,
sepulchral piles erected to the great who exhausted the splendor of
Egypt in their building, apparently more enduring than this decumbent
monarch.

The other, the Fallen Giant, fell during a storm in the early
seventies. Its mammoth prone trunk may be seen from the Cabin porch
today. Since its fall a troop of cavalry have been lined up in
formation upon it and a coach-and-four has been driven along its trunk.
Living, it stood among the foremost of the Grove. It was known as the
Andy Johnson Tree and was one of the famous giants of pioneer days. Now
all its glories have shrunken into a “curiosity,” for tourists take a
special delight in clambering up and stamping upon its grey surface to
test the soundness of its wood.

But the destructive work of time as a whole has been of less
consequence than that of fire. Of all the tragedies and great passions
of the elements that cross the silent life of a Sequoia, none can
compare with the sinister work of this forest fiend. Fire alone
seems able to inflict irreparable wounds, and nothing else, not even
disease, apparently ever injures the heart of a Sequoia. The immense
black charrings on many of the noble trees of the Grove bear silent
testimony to great conflagrations of the past. Yet, in a sense, the
Sequoia triumphs even over this arch enemy. Fires that totally destroy
its neighbors only assail its vitality after many and repeated attacks.
Enormous areas of its base may be burned and yet the tree will live on.
So erratic, indeed, may some of these injuries become that daylight
is let through the tree. Even if it be advanced in age, it will still
continue to put forth green leaves, persisting in a really remarkable
manner in the face of misfortune to which a lesser tree would
immediately succumb.

[Illustration: TELESCOPE TREE

  Light may be seen through this tree, hollowed by fire.

  MARIPOSA GROVE       Photo by H. S. Hoyt]

The Haverford, the Stable, and the Hermit’s Cabin are notable for
the large fire-created cavities of their bases. The Haverford has
had its broad base entirely hollowed out by flames which have burned
a three-chambered archway through the tree across two spurs, the
distance of which is 35 feet, and, transversely, 33 feet. Garrulous
stage-drivers of early days, whose creative faculties at times spurred
them on to daring mendacities, called the Haverford the “Tree of
Refuge” and alluded to the fact that 30 horses found safety and shelter
within its hollow trunk during a severe storm. When it is determined,
however, with certainty that but half this number of horses really were
sheltered, the size of this cavern in the base of a living tree is
still sufficiently striking.

The Stable Tree has a capacious hollow in its base almost forming a
room eight by twelve feet. It was because “Old Cunningham” manufactured
his quaint stock of curios in the hollow of this tree that it gained
the fitting appellation of the “Old Curiosity Shop.” Later when the
soldiers of the Government patrolled the Grove they tied their mounts
within this room-like hollow—a practice which eventually caused it to
be known as the Stable Tree.

The Hermit’s Cabin is a charcoal-lined circular chamber with a very
fine domed ceiling. It affords a spacious room in which some denizen
of the mountains could dwell in princely comfort and contentment. Wild
beasts may have made it their forest lair in the past, and the Indian
may have flaked his arrowheads within it while waiting for a storm to
pass. It is not altogether improbable that some failing miner may have
used it for his hermitage, seeking solace in the vast, silent bowers of
shade about him and submerging himself in the immense peacefulness of
the Grove—wandering, rambling at will, pausing to drink at a spring,
or anon to examine a flower, or to warm himself in the sun, bewildered
yet charmed by the fascination of it all; a dreamer seeming to hear the
laughter and voices of dear ones at home, but in reality listening to
the songs of birds.

But there are Sequoias even more fire-tortured than these. The
Telescope Tree is an erect, burnt-out, tubular trunk 220 feet high. Its
heartwood is completely gone. Tourists may enter it and look up through
its chimney-like cylinder to the blue sky above. Internally, its
appearance is that of a tree from which life has gone forever, while
externally it appears to be a perfectly sound tree. Of course, its top
is a ruin. But one up-turned limb remains. This abounds in the spirit
of intense life, for its bossy patches of deep blue-green foliage still
bear cones whose seeds perpetuate the endless cycle of the royal race.
Thus this tree—hardly more than a mere barkcovered shell, clings to
life with a Roman tenacity—the epitome of vitality.

Pluto’s Chimney is yet more of a ruin. It is nothing but a huge old
stub of a tree, blackened and burned inside and out. So forbidding
and fearsome is its interior aspect that some call it the “Devil’s
Dungeon.” But for all its dismal repellence, it, too, has its story to
tell. Like a battle-scarred veteran, its blackened body tells mutely
of a mighty struggle bravely waged against the forest fiend. The sun
lights its gloomy circular vault and sheds a troop of bright sunbeams
upon its dead walls as though to bless them and warm them back to life.
Even winter’s clouds sift snow in its burnt-out shell as though to cool
its fire-ravaged sides.

Yet another of these enormous charcoal-lined cylinders lies prostrate
not far away. Early travelers were accustomed to pursue each other
through it on horseback. But this pastime was put to an abrupt end by
a nearby Sequoia falling across it and breaking in the roof. Since
then spring floods have deposited considerable quantities of sediment,
lessening its diameter, so that today a man can just walk erect through
it. Still other similar fragments, the monuments of departed monarchs
of other centuries, dot the forest floor. To search these out is a
pleasure worth the climbing of a mountain to enjoy. Through ragged
knot-hole openings charming and enchanting glimpses of the forest may
be obtained. Seemingly, all that is unattractive is hidden from view
and the beauties of the picture can be contemplated at leisure.

Far greater than the destructive work of time is that of man. Against
his double-bitted axe the Sequoia is completely powerless. Ironically
enough, the larger and more remarkable the tree the more certain
and swift its doom. The rarity of the species is no bar against its
destruction. Indeed, man seems even eager to barter this most priceless
heritage for a handful of yellow gold. Wherever greed has had free rein
the Sequoia has been lumbered. For the past fifty years cuttings in
privately owned holdings of Sequoian tracts have continued unchecked.
The axe has removed a large part of the Sequoias in the Redwood
Mountain, Merced, and Tule River regions, and the sawmill is still at
its work of destruction in the magnificent forests of the Kings and
Kaweah River basins. “Earlier cutting,” states Sudworth, “took only a
part of this timber, but the later operations have removed practically
every tree.”

Has man no regard for the past—no sentiment of conservation for the
future? How can he trace the arduous survival of the Sequoia through
geological ages without acquiring a peculiar admiration and love for
it? How can he look upon such a living monument which connects the past
with the present and blink at its intellectual and aesthetic value?
When the Germans bombarded Rheims in 1914 and Turkish cannon demolished
the Parthenon of Athens in 1687, all lovers of architecture and the
beautiful stamped such acts as barbarism. But the rose window of Rheims
and the colonades of the Parthenon _can_ be restored. They were merely
man-made. Living things, however, once destroyed are forever lost to
the world. When the axe destroys a Sequoian grove it is irrevocably
gone, for, after all, “only God can make a tree.”

Were the commercial value of the Sequoia in any manner adequate to
its monumental value, all this vilifying would be but simon-pure
sentimentality. Could the wood of the Sequoia be used as girders and
columns in great halls and solemn cathedrals, its commercial use would
somewhat befit the nobility and heroic proportions of the tree. But it
is otherwise. The light, soft, brittle wood of the Big Tree unfits it
for supporting ponderous roofs and massive balconies. No wise architect
would use it in this manner. In fact, nearly every wood grown on the
American Continent is superior to the Big Tree in the weight it will
sustain.

Few other trees in their lumbering exceed the Giant Sequoia in
wastefulness. More lumber can be obtained from ash or maple than from
the Sequoia of the Sierra. This is due to the enormous size of the tree
and the brittle character of its wood. When a falling Sequoia strikes
the ground with the force of many thousands of tons, any inequality
of the earth’s surface suffices to break its trunk. Blasting must
then be employed to reduce the great pieces to sizeable dimensions
for handling. This results in fragments of all sorts unsuited for
commercial use, to say nothing of the great loss of that which is
cracked and splintered beyond all hope of salvage. “No where on the
face of the globe,” says Dudley, “can there be found more wasteful
lumbering. One-half to even three-fourths or seven-eighths of the great
trunks of the Sequoias of the Converse Basin (near the Kings River)
were broken and rent beyond use in falling.” In substance, breakage is
so great that the major portion of the wood is suitable only for grape
stakes and fence posts and the like. If no other tree save the Sequoia
could furnish these products, the destruction of its forests might be
justifiable. Hence, no other conclusion can be reached than that the
lumbering of the Sequoia is wholly unnecessary and deserving of the
severest condemnation.[3]

Yet more must be told. Much vandalism has been committed on the Sequoia
by man. Early accounts are filled with these “botanical tragedies”
which were perpetrated whenever the venture appeared profitable. For
instance, in 1878, a butchered specimen of the Giant Sequoia was
shipped from Tulare City to San Francisco for exhibition purposes and
gain. It was the largest Sequoia the vandals could find in the forest.
Fourteen feet above the ground they made the first cut and for twelve
days nine men disturbed the age-old peace of the place with the ring
of axes and the rasp of saws. Finally, the monarch that had defied the
passions of the elements for centuries fell, conquered by the blade.
Then the inside of the stump, which was 21 feet in diameter, was hewn
out to within a dozen inches or so of the foot-thick bark and the
hollow shell sawed into fifteen gigantic slabs. With indefatiguable
energy, a road six miles in length was constructed to haul these out of
the forest. Each slab made a load for eight horses, while two railroad
cars were required to transport them all. The so-called “curiosity”
was set up on Market Street as the largest tree yet discovered in
California. Strangely enough, this act elicited hardly a whisper of
indignation or a word of protest from Californians who seemed to regard
the exhibit as a “real novelty.”

The Calaveras Grove suffered grievously at the outset from such
barbaric acts. Two of its most imposing trees were destroyed. One of
the grandest trees in the Grove was bored down with pump-augers by five
men in twenty-two days in order to make a dancing floor—butchered, in
other words, to make an American holiday. Its great trunk, 302 feet
in height and 96 feet in circumference, was hacked and chopped by the
usual “pilgrims” desirous of securing specimens of their visit. The
other, the “Mother of the Forest,” was stripped of its bark in 1854
to a height of 116 feet—veritably “skinned alive” so that its bark
could be sent to the Crystal Palace in England, where the curious of
Europe could see how large and fine California’s Big Trees really were.
Naturally enough, this act brought death to the tree. “For years,”
Hutchings remarks, “its majestic form perpetually taunted the belittled
and sordid spirits that were the authors of her ruin. Yet the elements
sympathized with her unmerited disgrace and attempted to hasten her
dismemberment to cover the wrong.” In the early part of the present
century a fire almost completed the work. Now but a great blackened
trunk remains with two disfigured limbs bent upward like human arms as
if to say, “Forgive them, for only in darkness does vandalism flourish.”

Fortunately, the Mariposa giants have escaped all this ignominy.
The serenity of the grove has been unbroken by the death chant of a
Sequoia. It has never echoed to the measured chopping of the axe, the
droning swish of saws, the hoarse call of teamsters, the clanking of
irons, or the shrill whistle of the donkey-engine. The sawmill has
eaten its destroying way all around its boundaries, leaving desolation
in its wake. But the Mariposa Grove has been spared this fate. A more
noble use has been found for it.

[Illustration: WAWONA TREE

  The curious of the world have passed through this Sequoia for half a
  century

  MARIPOSA GROVE        Photo by H. S. Hoyt]

Only two trees within the boundaries of the Grove have been touched by
the axe—the Wawona and the California. Both have huge openings hewn
through them. However, this cutting has not been the work of vandalism,
for fire had prepared the way by almost tunneling through them. It was
possible, therefore, to complete the opening with little injury to the
tree in each instance. Indeed, it is not impossible that both of these
Sequoias will go on living long after the generation that let daylight
through them has been all but forgotten. The passage-way through the
Wawona was cut during the late seventies when Henry Washburn built
the first road through the Grove. The opening in the California Tree
was made much later, so that tourists could experience the novelty of
driving through a living tree in the late spring when the snow was yet
deep in the upper part of the Grove where the Wawona stands.

In all the world there is probably not another tree more celebrated
than the Wawona. It is neither wonderful in the massiveness of its
great red stem, or glorious in the symmetry of its domed crown; nor has
it the venerable picturesqueness of the Grizzly Giant, or the port,
pomp, or perfection of the Mariposa Tree. Its fame rests simply upon
the ten-foot passage-way through its base. Pictures of it appeared in
geographies over half a century ago; stage coaches have passed through
it times innumerable to the amazement always of certain of their
passengers without discomfort, and now thousands of automobiles drive
through it annually.

Of the wonder trees of the Mariposa Grove perhaps none offer a greater
object lesson to man than the Faithful Couple. From earliest times
mankind have destroyed each other and the fallacy of war has yet to be
learned. The Faithful Couple represent two trees that warred with each
other all their lives, never realizing the value of peace until, in the
weakness of their old age, they united their almost spent strength to
fight the greater battle against death.

They are the sole survivors of a former commonwealth of seedlings.
In company with a community of tiny trees they began their lives
on ground cleared for their reception by the fall of a giant of
a former generation or by a ground fire. Either of these agents
exposed the mineral soil so necessary to the life of the germinating
seed. Sunlight, too, must have been sifted down in proper amounts
since but little shade can be endured at any stage of the Sequoia’s
existence. Even then the hold this zealous crop of seedlings had on
life was precarious. From the instant they cast their tiny shadows on
the ground, excessive moisture, erosion, and wind threatened their
existence. Indeed, many must have perished in their earliest infancy
from these dangers.

As soon, however, as their branches and their roots began to interfere
with each other, a struggle of yet another sort ensued, and each
seedling began to battle fiercely with its neighbors for light and
nourishment. At the same time each exerted a beneficial influence
over the other by preventing the winds from drying out the soil or
the rains from carrying it away. Each was a member of a “protective
union,” mutually making for better conditions of growth which gave them
greater strength to carry on the fight for life. Strangely enough, each
continually comforted and assisted while at the same time attempting
to destroy each other, for they were the most deadly of enemies. Each
was shouting “excelsior” and endeavoring to rear its head above those
of its fellows in the race for the skies. “Aspire or die,” became the
watchword of the group. Gradually the most fit of the Sequoian youths
over-topped their slower rivals, eventually shutting off their share of
sunlight and ultimately snuffing out their lives. For generations this
struggle toward the sun went on, as terrible as it was silent, each
survivor eliminating its rivals. And all the while the sun, the one
object of this eternal striving, neither knew or apparently cared.

As the number of the defeated increased and the veterans became fewer
and fewer, the struggle became less intense. At last, but two of all
the host that started the fray of perpetuity versus extinction were
left. These remained to preach the aristocracy of the forest—that
it is of the best and for the best. The weak and unfit had been
vanquished. Only the straight-trunked and the strong lived to enjoy the
commonwealth of the sky. They were the chosen few. Now, unable to lift
their proud heads higher into the clouds, because Nature cannot pump
water to such dizzy heights, these two giants attempted to crowd one
another off the earth. Not satisfied that they had found a place in the
sun, they had to bear each other’s ill will. The struggle continued,
but each was as powerful as the other. At length, having wasted their
energy in useless conflict, they came to terms. Embracing, they finally
united in confiding communion the better to brave whatever blessing or
blast fate might bring them in their declining years. Have they learned
the worth of peace too late?

Near the Cabin stand four wonderfully perfect Sequoias. So military in
precision are they, so formal and rigid in their poise, and so perfect
in alignment, that they seem to be standing ever at attention. Hence,
they have been designated as the Old Guard. Others, however, prefer
to call them by the more poetical name of “Sun Worshippers,” for, as
the sun traces its long descent of midsummer afternoon, it throws a
golden shower of sunshine upon them, and they in turn appear to revel
in all this glory. Their great limbs, the size of ordinary trees, seem
uplifted in prayerful attitude, while nearby companies of pine and
fir appear to gather about these four high priests of the sun like
worshippers in humble veneration. At sunset, during the silent battle
between light and darkness, this effect is singularly impressive. Their
fine round trunks seem to glow, not unlike red-hot steel drawn from
intolerable flame, and their cool green domes are splashed with floods
of vermillion, gold, and purple, as the fading light plays its changing
wizardry upon their delicate foliage. Only at such a time does the
Sequoia lose its crushing dignity and its overwhelming complacency to
become a thing of beauty. Then, as the shadows steal forth and enfold
the solemn forest, and the red trunks burn lower and lower until,
finally, like lamps they go out, a mighty calm settles upon their
silent crests where departing day lingers in a last caress.

No review of the Mariposa giants would be complete without due mention
of the Fallen Hero Tree, which was dedicated by the American Legion of
California in the summer of 1921, to the Unknown Dead of the World War.
Surely, no dedication could be more fitting, for nothing living is more
monumental than the Giant Sequoia. Besides is it not better to preserve
monuments than to build them? “Almost no structure,” declares Dudley,
“erected by human hands has come down to us intact through the lifetime
of a Sequoia; and few that we can admire which are hewn from inanimate
marble or granite can be compared to a living organism vast in life
and complete in the records of every year of its existence. An empire
or republic may be compared with the life of this great tree, but what
empire or republic has lived twenty-five centuries? None worthy of the
name. Then, in the building of the Sequoia, no blood has been shed
through all its twenty-five hundred years of life, no injustice or
oppression have secured the means necessary for its construction, no
hatred or strife has been engendered, no accident occasioning pain or
suffering—no extinction of human life has left a stain on the history
of its growth.”

Again, from the standpoint of art and permanence, no dedication could
be more appropriate. Few living things merit a higher place in art
than the great Sequoia. It appeals to the highest intellectual and
spiritual qualities of man. Of all trees it is the most dignified and
majestic. After a shower its crown is oftentimes vested with a nameless
light—a glory not of this earth—never seen on granite crag or marble
temple. Then again no living thing is more enduring than the Sequoia.
Tombstones that mark the graves of the known heroes will have become
cornerless and the names they bear will have been obliterated by the
elements; those who knew and loved the names will have run their brief
course and be laid at rest, as will their children and many generations
after them, before the Fallen Hero Tree ceases to transmit to the
coming ages the memory of the Unknown Dead who fought, suffered, and
died in the Great War.

Assuredly, the Mariposa Grove has other values than that of a mere
“show place.” Aside from the size and age of its far-famed trees, the
Grove has power to inspire and its lesson to teach. Its trees have
stood steadfast for centuries indifferent to time and tide, the better
to admonish mortal man lest he forget his littleness. To contemplate
them in cold calm without feelings of reverence is impossible. No
artist has yet been able to adequately depict their God-like composure
and their haunting grandeur. Indeed, they are as gloriously beyond the
brush as they are above words. That stirring apostrophe of Byron to the
ocean is the nearest approach in all literature to their greatness.
Most mysterious of all natural wonders, they have looked on events that
distinguish centuries. Over them has been drawn the mantle of the past
and within them are locked many of the secrets of history.

To stand in the presence of such ancient things is to be able to sense
something of the riddle propounded by the inscrutable Sphinx. And
yet more wonderful is such an impression by moonlight. On every hand
tower the stern columns of the Sequoias, their shaggy crowns gemmed
with stars. About them are grouped other tree hosts, rising in files
and striving in vain to emulate the ample girth and majestic height
of the giants. These lesser trees are pines with a perfection almost
faultless, cedars as beautiful as those of Lebanon; and firs with a
grace not unlike that of hills sculptured by rain drops. Among these
are yet others—trees crooked and short and stumped; trees tall and slim
and slender. Through the rents in the roof of this aged forest the
moon looks in, sending long arrows of light to investigate some pitchy
obscurity, splashing the forest floor here and there with blotches
of silvery light and banding the open spaces with monstrous slanting
shadows of Sequoian columns. Formless masses of impenetrable darkness
loom everywhere. All the rest is a region of half-light in which
everything is seen and nothing recognized. All is wrapped in a cloak of
unreality, lending a weird, almost theatrical effect. Shadows move with
a ghostly sound throughout the cavernous chambers. The perpetual peace
of night is upon the forest.

Then it is that the Sequoia is almost holy in its tremendous power
to inspire reverence. Only in the solitudes of the sea where there
is no trace of land or sail to break the fearful circle set upon the
surface of the great deep is such an impression of the mystic charm of
space received. Here the immensity of sea and sky is comparable to the
over-shadowing majesty of the Sequoia. The soul is overwhelmed with
solemnity. The immeasurable calm and solitude of it all overflows like
a tide. One seems on the threshold of oblivion. Life’s endless toil and
endeavor are at an end, for one has caught a glimpse of the immortal.




                              +Chapter V+

                        OLDEST OF LIVING THINGS


When that intrepid botanist-explorer, David Douglas, who in his lonely
wanderings along the Pacific endured numberless hardships that he might
make the flowers and trees of the coast known to science, first saw
the Redwoods while traveling through the Santa Cruz forest in 1830,
they invoked in him feelings of the most profound awe. He hesitated to
describe them lest he fall into discredit among his friends in England.
“New and strange things seldom fail to make strong impressions,” he
wrote in his Journal, “and are therefore frequently over-rated. This
tree gives the mountains a most peculiar, I was going to say, awful
appearance—something which plainly tells me that we are not in Europe.”

Little did this awestruck wanderer know that yet larger trees stood in
these princely forests of the Western world. In fact, almost a quarter
century elapsed before the presence of the Giant Sequoia was made
known. John Bidwell has sometimes been accredited their discovery in
1841. But the more acceptable and authoritative record of discovery
is that of A. T. Dowd who, while hunting, came quite by accident upon
the Calaveras Grove eleven years later. Even then Dowd’s story was
accepted with much doubt and it was necessary to resort to a ruse in
order to induce even a few skeptical workmen to confirm the discovery.
Still the truth of David Douglas’ moralizing on the over-rating of
strong impressions asserted itself, and traveler after traveler had his
reputation for truthfulness sorely tried until almost a “convention
of naturalists” had seen the mammoth tree and given their unanimous
testimony as to its size. Then the great Sequoia became an almost
meteoric celebrity, for few plants have attracted as much attention in
so short a period of time. Since then the Sequoia has been lauded in
every land as the largest and most nobly proportioned of trees. It has
found its way sometimes in a most engaging manner into literature. For
instance, in Victor Hugo’s _Toilers of the Sea_, an old seaman who had
gathered from his voyages many wonderful stories, tells a child of a
hollow tree in California “so vast that a man on horseback could ride
one hundred paces inside.”

Yet the prodigious size of the Sierra Sequoia is hardly as wonderful as
its remarkable age. That it should become known as the oldest living
thing that human eyes can look upon is truly marvelous.

The elements to which the Sequoia is indebted for its great age are as
enigmatic as they are controversial. Foremost of these is the tree’s
intense desire to live. It seems never weary with the weight of years,
and is blessed with a tenacity, a faith in life granted to no other
living thing. From the finely interlaced network of its shallow root
system to the utmost tip of every tiny needle, it displays a fervent
love of life.[4] Indeed, there is a joy in noting the eager attitude
of the foliage as it stretches out toward the light to gather the
sunshine. Every unnecessary and useless branch is promptly discarded
and the entire energy of the tree is devoted toward putting forth new
foliage the better to capture the sunbeams.

The altitude in which the Sequoia grows produces the loveliest verdure
of the Sierras. All seems submersed in an ocean of sunlight. It is a
region lifted above the thirsty foothills and yet far enough below the
vacant solitudes of perpetual ice and naked rock to be free from the
searing heat and dust of the former and the tragedy and wreck of the
latter. John Muir so delighted in the “glorious floods of light” that
pervaded this region that he referred to the Sierra, not as the snowy
range, but the “Range of Light.”

This abundance of sunshine, then, helps to explain the splendid
conifers that the middle heights of the Sierra produce. The amount of
solar heat sensibly affects the growth of trees. It is in the presence
of sunlight that the green coloring matter in leaves is able to digest
plant food. Yet this is not the all-important factor. Moisture plays
a most potent role, also. The distribution of the lingering patches
of the Sequoia reveals the powerful influence of moisture over the Big
Tree. In the northern limits of its range, the Sequoia exists at a
lower altitude (4,500 feet) where moisture is plentiful, while in the
southern portion of the belt it climbs nearer the summit peaks (7,000
feet) where the drying heat of the San Joaquin plains is modified by
elevation. The inexorable force exerted by moisture over the Sequoia is
even better demonstrated by individual trees. All the better specimens
are found growing in well watered places. Springs often bubble forth
from the wide-spread masses of sponge-like Sequoian roots, indicative
of the constant underground irrigation system that supplies the tree
with mineral nutriment. The stunted are nearly always found growing in
the dryer spots, looking very rusty but resolute; the thrifty tower
about boggy meadows or along the drainage of water courses whose waters
roar in their channels in flood time and trickle from pool to pool with
faint murmur in Autumn after the azalea has bloomed and the mountain
lilac has lost its badge of Spring.

Indeed, it would be difficult to conceive a tree that has established
a more adequate and harmonious relationship in concordance with both
climate and soil. Under the most constant stimulus of the elements
so vital to the growth of trees in general, the Sequoia is sustained
by soil, deep and rich, by sunshine, and by moisture, as well as by
the other elements which it, in common with other associated trees,
derives from the air. Nevertheless, the sugar pine often enjoys such
idyllic conditions, as do the silver fir and the incense cedar. Yet the
Big Tree exceeds them all in size. Since it so outranks its fellows
in girth and longevity, the Sequoia must, therefore, possess certain
superior innate qualities that are found wanting in other trees.

Theoretically, there is no limit to the girth of trees. There _is_
a limit, however, to the height of a column which Nature, working
silently through centuries, builds. One theory holds that this limit
is governed by the distribution of sap. When the tree attains a
height beyond which its circulating fluids cannot rise, upward growth
practically ceases and all appreciable growth is in girth. Since there
are no limits to dilation, the tree is capable of indefinite expansion.
Normally, however, counteracting causes which at first retard, then
arrest, are continually at work, finally checking the progress
of growth. The tree most completely free from such counteracting
influences logically attains the greatest size and age.

This, then, is the keynote of the Sequoia’s great age. There is a limit
to its height, but none, apparently, to its rotundity. So long as
the growth of the Big Tree is unimpaired, it continues with patient,
steady, indefatigable energy to add ring after ring to its stem year
after year, century after century. In time the old channels become
clogged with insoluble matter taken up by the roots and the annual
layers become successively consolidated until the united cells attain
such strength that the vast wooden pillar defies the onslaught of the
elements. It stands a monument of power, emblematic of the limitless
desire to live.

“Trees,” states Asa Gray in his famous essay on the _Longevity of
Trees_, “far outlast all living things. They never die of old age,
but only from injury or disease, or, in a word, from accidents. If
not destroyed by accident, that is, by extrinsic causes—they do not
eventually perish, like ourselves, from old age. It is commonly
thought that they are fully exposed to the inevitable fate of all
living things, but this springs from a false analogy which we have
unconsciously established between plants and animals. This popular
analogy might, perhaps, hold good if the tree were actually formed like
the animal, all parts of which are created at once in their rudimentary
state, and soon attain their fullest development so that the functions
are carried on throughout life in the same set of organs. If this were
the case of the tree it would likewise die sooner or later of old age.

“But the tree is an aggregate of many individuals united in a common
trunk and why should not the aggregate, the tree, last indefinitely? To
establish the proper analogy, we must not compare the tree with man,
but with the coral formations in which numerous individuals, engrafted
and blended on a common base, conspire to build up immense coral groves
which have endured for ages; the inner and older parts consisting of
the untenanted cells of individuals that have long since perished,
while fresh structures are continually produced on the surface. The
individuals, indeed, perish; but the aggregate may endure as long as
time itself. So with the tree.

“Only the leaf may be said to die of old age. It lives but a single
season and is the proper emblem of mortality. But the leaves are
necessarily renewed every year, so are the other essential organs of
the plant. It annually renews not only its buds and leaves, but its
wood and its roots; everything, indeed, that is concerned with its life
and growth.

“Though the wood in the center and large branches—the produce of buds
and leaves that had long ago disappeared—may die and decay; yet, while
new individuals are formed on the surface with each successive crop of
fresh buds, and placed in as favorable communication with the soil and
the air as their predecessors, the aggregate, the tree, would appear to
have no necessary, no inherent limit to its existence.”

Of the many chapters of evidence gathered by this American botanist on
the remarkable age of certain trees, none made mention of trees older
than the Sequoia. The ancient oak which cost the poets much mental toil
in their panegyrics to its strength and endurance falls far short of
the Sequoia in age; nor do the lordly Cedars of Lebanon, “from which
the sacred writers derived so many noble images,” nor the venerable
yews, “whose branches were used by our pagan ancestors to deck the
graves of the dead as the emblem of immortality,” exceed it in years.
The Mexican cypress may have witnessed the rise and fall of the Aztec
Empire, but they are not coeval with the Christian era that has seen
the decay and death of a score of empires. Sengal Baobabs and Teneriffe
Dragon Trees may be reputed to be the “most ancient living monuments in
the world,” but they do not antedate Solomon’s time.

Since no tree, apparently, surpasses the Sequoia in longevity it
must enjoy an immunity from the causes that take off other trees.
Ordinarily, weakness in trees results from a diminution of resistance
and rejuvenating power, or a loss of vitality. The protecting bark is
often lacerated and stripped away through accident, creating wounds
through which insects gain easy entrance to carry on their insidious
work. Fire often exposes the tender tissues in which the spores of
fungi find lodgment and breed disease. Instances of the death of trees
through these causes are legion throughout the forests of the Sierra.
The magnificent silver firs seldom live to see their three hundredth
birth year, and though externally of sound and fair appearance, when
cut they are not infrequently found to be a mass of watery, decayed
wood inside. Through a loss of vitality the noble sugar pines likewise
are often devoured by larvae soon after reaching maturity.

[Illustration: FALLEN MONARCH

  This tree shows no evidence of decay after decades of mountain
  weather

  MARIPOSA GROVE        Photo by H. S. Hoyt]

Yet strangely enough, the Sequoia appears untouched by the forces of
decay. This tale of a struggle into being, of a life lived, of decay
and death, is written on all of Nature’s works. The way of life and
its destined end is toward oblivion. But causes that conspire to bring
about the end of trees in general appear unable to quench the vitality
within a Sequoia. It rarely ever shows the slightest evidence of
weakness, and appears never to be defiled by the ravages of disease.
Injuries only of the greatest magnitude are a source of irrecoverable
loss. Indeed, Sequoias that have great holes burned in them are
magnificent in their refusal to accept defeat. They summon their
splendid resources, clutch the soil with a broader and deeper hold in
their determination to enjoy life to the very last. So long as there is
a sound root left, it is the way of a Sequoia to cling to life. No one
who has an appreciation of the wonders of Nature can behold this grim,
steadfast, dogged resolution that prevails against all odds without
feeling the beauty of such an unconquerable spirit.

The wood of the Sequoia seems to be provided with every refinement of
durability. Natural decomposition is slow and its wood wastes away
insensibly like granite. So resistant is it to weather, to the rigorous
and incessant forces of obliteration, that it is hardly an exaggeration
to affirm “that a log cabin built of Giant Sequoia logs on granite will
last as long as its foundation.” The resinous matters that pervade
wood are considered a preservative against decay. Hardwood has always
been indicative of durability, whereas the wood of the Sequoia is soft
and brittle. But for all its softness and lack of resin, though hoary
and mossy with age, and deformed by centuries of violent storms, the
Sequoia is nearly always sound _from the sapwood to the center_, and
this is more than can be said of nearly all the “remarkable and curious
cases” of trees that have enjoyed a great longevity as cited by Asa
Gray.

Most impressive of the excellent qualities of the Sequoia, however, is
its amazing vitality. In the ability to recover from accident it is
probably excelled by no other tree. The shadows of twenty centuries
may sleep beneath its boughs, yet its growing power is as active as
ever, the tree ever rallying in apparent youthful vigor to replace
its broken, tempest-tossed crown. It defies even the wrath of heaven.
Though lightning may shatter a pine to splinters, it can but knock off
fifty feet, more or less, of a Sequoia’s crown. Never has it been
known to have destroyed a Sequoia outright. “Thousands of years the
Sequoia stands offering its head to every passing cloud as if praying
for heaven’s fire as a blessing,” observed John Muir. “Then when the
old head is off, every bud and branch becomes excited like a colony of
bees that have lost their queen, and tries hard to repair the damage.
Branches that for centuries have grown out horizontally at once begin
to turn upward and all the branchlets arrange themselves with reference
to a new top of the same ineffably fine contour as the old one. And
curious enough, all very old Sequoias have lost their crowns in this
manner. Of all living things, they seem to be the only ones able to
wait long enough to be struck by lightning.”

The power of a Sequoia to heal an immense fire scar is another
noteworthy manifestation of its vitality. Its resistance to fire is
almost incredible. Its massive, unresinous bark offers an almost
asbestos-like exterior to the eternal antagonist of the forest. Its
wood, too, is so non-resinous in character that it burns with marked
sluggishness, and it is only after repeated attacks by fire that the
wood will be consumed.

Even when fire has made serious inroads the Sequoia refuses to be
discouraged. It musters all its energy and attempts to heal the
burned area by extending the living tissue over the blackened wound
and reuniting the broken circle of its cambium layer. This healing
occurs in a rhythmical and pulsating manner accompanying the seasons,
beginning along the margins of the burned area. Each year the layer
of new wood-tissue encroaches slowly and patiently upon the injured
area, diminishing the charring until the two opposite folds touch one
another. In a few years the bark is pinched out and once more the
annual layers become continuous around the tree. The wound is healed,
and as the centuries pass it recedes deeper and deeper within the heart
of the tree, unchanged and never a source of decay.

The late Dr. Dudley examined the stump of a lumbered Sequoia in the
Converse Basin which registered the effects of great forest fires. He
found the tree to be 2,171 years old when cut down. At the age of 516
years the tree suffered its first burn, acquiring a scar three feet in
width. One hundred and five years were required to heal the injury.
A second burn occurred when the tree was 1,712 years old, making two
wounds, one twelve inches in width, the other two feet. One hundred and
thirty-nine years passed before these scars were covered. Then, when
the tree came to be 2,068 years old, a tremendous conflagration burned
a great scar eighteen feet wide and thirty feet high. This was still
unhealed when the tree was cut down. Professor Dudley estimated that at
the rate of the above healing it would require at least _four centuries
and a half_ to repair the result of the injury done by this last forest
fire.

No other tree could have lived under similar circumstances without
becoming diseased or decayed. This greatest among trees stands alone
in its superb resistance to insect and fungi attack, and this, coupled
with a marvelous recuperative power, enables it to withstand injuries
of such considerable magnitude, and to endure long enough to recover
from them. Its vitality, as deep as it is tenacious, and its very love
for living, vest it with this sublime power. Symbol of an unconquered
will, the Sequoia has caught more of the immortal than any other
living thing. The Gordian Knot of its existence would never be cut
were it possible to protect it for all time from fire and the axe.
Had it remained untouched by flames of the past, the vastly shrunken
present-day habitat of this great tree might possibly contain the
ragged rear guards of the departed giants of the Miocene, and a single
Sequoia would be old enough to establish a paleontological era.




                              +Chapter VI+

                            THE ETERNAL TREE


The Grizzly Giant is among the first born of the living things of the
earth. It bears greater evidence of extreme age than any other living
Sequoia of the Mariposa Grove and may be of a former generation. The
companions of its youth are dead and buried in their graves of leaf
mold and it seems to have been nearing its prime when the other lofty
monarchs of today were unknown. Grand and unconquerable, mightiest of
the mighty lords of the forest, it stands like an agonized Sampson
of the woods, blind and lost, with a hundred great arms groping and
reaching out. Like all Nature’s works of power, it seeks to express
more than it can convey. Homeric in its gravity, marble in its
impassiveness, and majestic in its tranquility, it is unapproachable
among things that live. Aspiring toward the clouds and on speaking
terms only with the heavens, its equanimity seems unruffled by storm
or tempest; its sweet serenity unsullied by anger, hatred or other
passions unworthy of an immortal nature. For a thousand years the
earliest rays of dawn have gilded it. For ten centuries departing day
has lingered and played on its summit. Surely the mellow notes of the
hermit thrush issuing forth from such loftiness sound more angelic
there than elsewhere.

Joseph Le Conte left posterity an indelible picture of this tree. “Of
all the trees of the Grove, and, therefore, of all trees I have ever
seen, the Grizzly Giant impressed me the most profoundly; not, indeed,
by its tallness or its symmetry, but by the hugeness of its cylindrical
trunk, and by a certain gnarled grandeur, a fibrous, sinewy strength
which defies time itself. The others with their smooth, straight,
tapering shafts towering to a height of over two hundred feet seemed
to me the type of youthful vigor and beauty in the plentitude of power
and success. But _this_, with its large, rough, battered trunk nearly
thirty feet in diameter—with top broken off at a height of two hundred
and four feet, with its great limbs six to eight feet in diameter,
twisted and broken—seemed to me the type of a great life, declining but
still strong and self-reliant. Perhaps my own top with its departing
foliage made me sympathize with this grizzled giant; but I found
the others, too, standing with hats in hand and gazing in silent,
bare-headed reverence upon this grand old tree.”

The size of the Grizzly Giant is sufficient to stimulate the mind to
silent musings. Often this leads to “cord wood contemplations,” for
the mind, in attempting to realize the prodigious amount of timber
such a stem might contain, is naturally apt to associate unknown
quantities with known. Ordinarily, a statement on the size of this
tree, if unsupported by other known comparison, is of little import.
That it requires a short journey to walk around it; that twenty
people can hardly encompass its girth touching hands; that fourteen
horses, head to tail, can just encircle its base, serve to visualize
the measurement. If it were pierced by a lofty arch, two street cars,
side by side, could pass through it; or, if it were hollowed out into
a round room with a row of seats cut out of the solid heart wood, a
round table could be set in the center and fourteen guests could be
seated about it with uncrowded ease. If it were cut into lumber, two
hundred cords of firewood and over half a million board feet[5] could
be obtained from its trunk, while its shattered crown would still lie
untouched on the forest floor, a beautiful rosy red and emerald ruin
awaiting the coming of some all-devouring forest fire.

The Grizzly Giant has long been the subject of much unpardonable
exaggeration by popular rhapsodists. There is little doubt but that
this tree, presumably the most ancient thing endowed with life on the
planet, may fairly claim an almost fabulous antiquity. It has escaped
the usual accidents to which the Sequoia is heir, and, as a result, has
attained a longevity that far exceeds the ordinary life-span of the
species. Since this is known, the age of the Grizzly Giant can be
stated approximately. Its exact age, however, can never be ascertained
until the annual rings of its trunk are counted, and this cannot be
accomplished without felling the tree.

[Illustration: GRIZZLY GIANT, THE ETERNAL TREE

  MARIPOSA GROVE        Photo by H. S. Hoyt]

Nor is it possible to determine the age of a Sequoia merely from its
diametric measurement. Up to the present century there prevailed
a common belief that this could be done and that great size was
indicative of great age. If a tree measured ten feet in diameter, the
supposition was that another of the same species twice as large would,
accordingly, be twice as old. However, Dudley, who spent many summers
in the logged areas of the Converse Basin, found this to be untrue
of the Sequoia. One tree thirty-nine feet in circumference proved to
be 2,171 years old; while another twice its circumference, or nearly
eighty feet, was 1,510 years old.

From a close study of various age classifications, it was believed
that the annual growth could be calculated. But even this method has
been found unreliable. After a careful study of various ages, Jepson
determined upon an average basis of twenty years of growth to every
inch. The unfortunate tree in the Calaveras Grove which was ruthlessly
cut down that its stump might serve as a dance floor had a diameter
of twenty-seven feet, exclusive of bark. Thus, its computed age would
have been 6,480 years; whereas, its true age was but 1,300 years.
Notwithstanding the impossibility of determining the age of a Sequoia
from its diametric measurement, the ages of a representative number of
felled Sequoias are definitely known. From these it has been possible
to ascertain that the average age of the tree is between 900 and 2,100
years. The oldest Sequoia found by Dudley showed 2,425 annual rings,
while the most ancient tree logged thus far in the Converse Basin
had an age of 3,148 years. John Muir counted over 4,000 rings on a
“majestic, old, fire-scarred monument” in the Kings River forest.
These are the oldest trees of which science has definite record.
Consequently, it would not be rash to estimate the age of the Grizzly
Giant at 3,000 years. Figures, however, of 8,000 years and more are
assuredly absurd and fabulous; and yet, they are given by several
authors of credit, and by a distinguished authority on fishes in
particular.

A pile of stones that has looked upon great events possesses an
indefinable something that stirs the mind profoundly, lifting it
to a higher level of feeling. Byron touched the keynote of this
sentiment when he spoke of the “mountains that looked upon Marathon.”
Feeling the need of some witness of that event, his imagination
vested those blind mountains with sight. Likewise, in beholding the
gathered companies of crag and spire from the summit of Mt. Whitney,
Clarence King was overwhelmed with a sense of the power and tragedy
of geological struggle. Feeling that this splendid mass of granite
was contemporaneous with great events, he endowed it with a quality of
consciousness. Yet how infinitely more sublime is this feeling when the
object is a living thing. What changes have occurred on the earth since
the tiny seed of the Grizzly Giant sent down its first threadlike roots
to the mineral soil! Thirty centuries are spanned by its life. Even
at thought of this the mind teems with images and memories of events
that have transpired during the life and growth of this single tree,
it endows the blind yet living column with sight, places it upon some
lofty height, and imagines that far below it sees “the far-winding path
of human progress, from dim Cimmerian shores of prehistoric shadow into
the fuller yet broken and fitful light of the modern time.”

The great white race which dominates the world today had made its
entrance on the stage of history when the Grizzly Giant began its
existence. And within the lifetime of this tree, this race, known as
Indo-European, has made vast and noble contributions to the culture of
man. Indeed, most of the triumphs of truth and genius over prejudice
and tradition in every decade since have been the triumphs of these
gifts of the Indo-European peoples.

Drifting southward tribe by tribe from their grassland homes between
the Danube and the Black Sea, these ancestors of the present people of
Europe, came into conflict with the first civilizations four or five
thousand years ago.

Among the first to be victorious were the Persians. These barbarians
fell upon the effeminate city-dwellers of the Tigris and Euphrates
Rivers, reduced the conquered to slaves and set themselves up as the
aristocrats of the land. But civilization conquered them and they
became refined, lost their original hardihood, and were, in their turn,
conquered by other barbarians who, too, became civilized. These were
the Greeks under Alexander the Great. They infused new blood into the
stagnant pools of culture they found in the Orient, and the product
was Hellenism. But Greece, too, fell into a decline and came under the
dominion of Rome, whose stability, organization, and power advanced
culture again. At length Rome grew weak like the others, and became
unable to defend herself against other roving hordes of Indo-Europeans.
Fortunately, however, she preserved this precious thing known as
civilization long enough for the barbarians to respect it and enabled
the Christian Church to shelter it during the Dark Ages. Such is the
drama of the growth of civilization which occurred on the earth during
the time when the Grizzly Giant was making its patient climb toward the
sun.

The greatest empire of the Bronze Age, Egypt, had fallen; Babylon
showed evidence of decay; Palestine was at the zenith of her career;
and Homeric Greece was laying the foundation for classic Greece, when
this oldest of trees was sprouting from its tiny seed, unpacking its
tender leaves, and taking its first feeble hold on life. The Trojan War
(1194–1184 B. C.) was a very recent event, for prosperous and wealthy
Troy had been destroyed by a few Greeks who resented her commercial
rivalry. Homer was not yet born, hence the epic of the burning of Troy
and the rescue of a beautiful woman had yet to be written by this poet
of supreme genius. The Hebrew nation had not reached its golden age
under Solomon, but David had vanquished the Philistines, united his
people, driven the Canaanites out of Jerusalem and made himself King
of an extensive empire. This, then, was the status of the civilized
world around 1100 B. C. The code of Hammurabi was already more than a
thousand years old; the Great Pyramid of Gizeh was almost as old as the
Christian religion is today; the Great Wall of China had nearly nine
hundred years to wait before its first stone would be laid (214 B. C.);
while Rome, the Eternal City, lacked over three hundred and fifty years
of its traditional founding (753 B. C.)

While the Grizzly Giant was a sapling, a Sequoia of awkward and
ungainly mien, bushy, bent, and crooked by the weight of winter snows,
the Assyrians were gaining a great ascendency in the East. They had
developed war to a high point of perfection by equipping an army
for the first time with iron weapons and chariots drawn by horses.
“Whenever they swept through a land they left a trail of ruin and
desolation behind. Around smoking heaps which had once been towns,
stretched lines of stakes on which were hung the bodies of rebellious
rulers flayed alive; while all around rose mounds and piles of the
slaughtered heaped to celebrate the great King’s triumph. Through the
clouds of dust rising along the main roads of the Empire men of the
subject kingdoms beheld great herds of cattle, horses, asses, flocks of
sheep and goats, and long lines of camels laden with gold and silver,
the wealth of the conquered, converging on the palace of Nineveh.
Before them marched the chiefs of the plundered kingdoms carrying the
severed heads of their former rulers about their necks.” And mothers
prayed then as now that there would be no more War.

While the Grizzly Giant was yet a youth, the Persians gained the
lordship of the East and lost it later to Alexander the Great. Greece,
under Pericles, raised human culture to the highest pinnacle yet
attained; Herodotus founded history; Buddha saw his vision of the
serenity of the soul; Confucius left to posterity his code of personal
conduct. During this fruitful period of man’s advancement, the Grizzly
Giant had become conscious of its destiny and had begun to aspire
heavenward and attain its place in the sun. Having a form of conical
perfection, it was very aristocratic in its trimness. Densely clothed
with-short whip-like branches from base to tip, it gradually arose
in fringed growths which narrowed pyramid-like toward the sky with
charming grace. Other trees show their trunks and knotted boughs, but
this tree was compact like a Sequoian cone, and permitted no branch to
be seen. Its foliage was of the most exquisite fineness, resembling a
series of morning-glory blossoms strung on a string, and forming the
softest of forest scenery. The tree had a suppleness which, compared
with its present-day rigidity of old age, was as sensitive as the
leaves of the quaking aspen.

When it reached the glory of prime and attained the lusty strength of
maturity, it had lost its youthful characteristics and assumed the
nobility of the Sequoia. Having shed the purplish, leaden-gray, flaky
bark of early years, it had taken on the deep red, fibrous bark that
distinguishes its royal nature. Having also discarded all of its lower
branches, it disclosed a straight, regularly tapering trunk fluted with
long parallel furrows. This great shaft, both inspiring in its height
and uplifting in its stateliness, supported a magnificent dome-shaped
crown. In this sumptuous top a multitude of tiny cones ripened
annually and sent forth myriads of golden-winged seeds on the Autumn
breezes. Soaring now above all the lesser trees of the forest, it lost
its desire to go yet higher. Serene and grand, this king of trees
presented that “perfect combination of beauty, strength, and grandeur
which marks it the noblest of God’s trees.”

At this time Imperial Rome, sitting on her seven hills, was the center
of the world’s culture, its progress and power. Rome had enjoyed two
centuries of peace—the longest period of order and prosperity mankind
has ever known—and had reached her greatest territorial extent under
Hadrian (138 A. D.) Julius Caesar had destroyed the Republic; Augustus
had founded the Empire; the Star of Bethlehem had proclaimed the
Birth of the Saviour; Palestine had become a holy land; the world had
received the Christian conception of the dignity of labor and the
brotherhood of man, and Calvary had witnessed the spectacle of the
Crucifixion. Already Nero had inaugurated Christian persecutions by
illuminating his gilded palace with human torches, and the Cross had
begun in earnest its conquest of the world.

When Alaric knocked at the Gates of Rome, the Grizzly Giant had arrived
at full maturity. Its base had become greatly enlarged, the better
to bear up its great weight; while its crown had grown more open,
displaying enormously large, gnarled, and knotty branches, each bearing
a dense mass of blue-green foliage that melted impalpably away into the
sky like vagrant shreds of clouds.

And from the Fall of Rome to the present day, the Grizzly Giant has
passed through maturity and on into life’s late afternoon shadows.
It first saw the light of day when European civilization was in its
dawn and has continued apace with its progress, the epitome of the
advancement of the Indo-European peoples. Empires have risen, reached
the zenith of their power, and passed on to decay and oblivion within
its life time. Nations have succeeded Empires, and these, too, have
been followed in their turn by other world powers, like meteors in the
sky of history, and this aged monarch has reigned on. Like some ancient
thing of the dead ages, it seems to have been forgotten by death so
that it might live on until the sun is a burnt-out cinder in the sky.

Impassive, resolute, and self-possessed, it stands unmoved and
unaffected by the world about it, unconcerned with its pompous shams,
its trite pride, its hollow vanity. Grizzled and picturesque with
age, it still clings to life with sublime tenacity. The lightnings of
countless clouds have failed to take its life; the snows of a thousand
winters have shattered and broken its royal crown; the storms of
over ten centuries have stripped it nearly bare of its bark and have
mercilessly washed the soil from its roots, while the insect foes and
fungi pests of three thousand years have left it as unharmed as fitful
winds leave the heavens. The oldest living thing, triumphant over
tempest and flame, verdant and fruitful, giving shelter to all seekers
thereof, and sending forth flocks of singing feathered creatures
annually from its great crown like its own flocks of winged seeds from
its cone, the Grizzly Giant stands—content.




                             +Chapter VII+

                         A BLOSSOM OF DECADENCE


Is the great Sequoia a tree that dreads tomorrow? This mournful
question was raised over a half century ago by prominent naturalists
of the period. Imbued with the idea that all living things have their
day in this world of evolving forms of life, they were unable to see a
future for a tree whose race has played so large a role in the past.

Acquainted with the northern groves where the Sequoias are nearly
all aged, they could see in them only pitiful, fast-dwindling stands
desperately huddled in patches where environment insured conditions
ideal for tree life. This they accepted as evidence that the Sequoia
stood at the brink of extinction; that it had outlived its day of
vigor and progress, and was but a race in its dotage. The surviving
remnants were hardly more than a faint echo of past glory, displaying
“the munificence of departing greatness” but expressing, as a race, a
blossoming of decadence.

Among the first to sound this note of alarm was Asa Gray. Addressing
a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science
in 1872, he stated: “The _Sequoia gigantea_ of the Sierra exists in
numbers so limited that the separate groves may be reckoned upon the
fingers, and the trees of most of them have been counted, except near
the southern limit, where they are said to be more copious. A species
limited in individuals holds its existence by a precarious tenure, and
this has a foothold only in a few sheltered spots of a happy mean in
temperature and locally favored with moisture in summer. Even then,
for some reason or other, the pines, the firs, and even the incense
cedars possess a great advantage and wholly overpower the Sequoia in
numbers. Seedlings of the big trees occur not rarely, but in a meagre
proportion to those of associated trees; and small, indeed, is the
chance that these seedlings will attain to ‘the days of the years of
their forefathers.’ The force of numbers eventually wins. Whatever the
individual longevity, certain if not speedy is the decline of a race in
which a high death rate afflicts the young.

“In the commonly visited groves _Sequoia gigantea_ is invested in its
last stronghold, can neither advance into more exposed positions above,
nor fall back into drier and barer ground below, nor hold its own in
the long run where it is under the present conditions; and a little
drying out of the climate of the region, which must have been much
moister than now, would precipitate its doom.”

Man, seemingly, has conspired with Nature in bringing the Sequoia under
the inexorable law of extinction. He lacks respect for this priceless
heritage of earlier ages, for already many of the most magnificent
stands of the Sequoia have been logged. If commercialism is allowed to
go its wayward way unchecked, posterity will soon be robbed of these
last remaining remnants of the forests of the Miocene. Even now man
is bringing the age of Mammals to a close. Soon there will be no wild
life left except in those spots that are given protection. Outside of
these areas, all life will be destroyed save those plants and animals
that have been reclaimed from the wild. Then man will stand alone and
unchallenged amid the wreck of creation.

Happily, this melancholy cry is not the expression of an actual fact,
at least, so far as the Sequoia is concerned. Enough Sequoian tracts
have been made safe from the axe to insure the future of the race and
to prevent ultimate destruction at the hands of man. Nor is the tree in
danger of natural extinction if the salvaged Sequoian tracts reproduce
in sufficient numbers to continue the struggle for existence. If this
can be proved to a reasonable certainty, then the Sequoia, as a race,
is not fated to be without descendants.

Unlike the Redwood of the coast, the great Sequoia of the Sierra does
not reproduce by root or stump sprouts, but from seed only. The seeds
are in cones exceedingly small for so colossal a tree, being hardly
larger than a small egg. These ovule bodies are composed of thirty
to forty closely packed, woody, persistent scales, each with four to
six seeds at its base. Two years are required for the cone to mature,
and by early Autumn of the second year their olive green, purplish
color has faded to a dull yellowish brown, the cone has shrunken and
the scales parted sufficiently to liberate its seeds to the wind. So
insignificant looking are these tiny seeds that few fail to marvel
that they should contain the actual germ which produces the largest
inhabitant of the world’s forests. But the size of a mustard seed, with
membranous disk-like wings, they are so light that they make a sound
almost imperceptible to the human ear in their glancing and wavering
fall to the forest floor.

Not less impressive is the abundance of these seeds. Over three hundred
are contained within each cone. John Muir counted on two ordinary
specimen branches over four hundred and eighty cones containing at
least one hundred and forty thousand seeds. This led him to state that
“millions of seeds are ripened annually by a single tree, and in a
fruitful year the product of one of the northern groves would contain
enough to plant all the mountain ranges of the world.” Surely, the cone
of the Sequoia presses closely upon the classic pomegranate in the
number of its seeds and may well be considered the symbol of abundance.

During the droning days of Autumn when the air is freighted with a
calm, serious stillness, and a thousand wild creatures are occupied
with tasks that fulfill an instinctive provision for a coming want,
the squirrels are busy gathering the Sequoia cones, small as they are.
Throughout these quiet days the sound of their dropping may be heard
and grey-furred bodies may be seen coming down the great red trunks
with nervous, jerky vehemence—trunks whose bark has known the tiny
feet of others of their voluble kin decades ago. Securing the cones
they have cut down with their “ivory sickles,” these diligent little
harvesters store them away for winter use. Often forgotten, these
cones, buried at the proper depth for germination, become the means of
further perpetuating the race of the giants.

Other creatures, too, are laying up provisions for the winter. Birds
are amazingly industrious. Some are gathering with much fuss into
flocks preparatory for southward flight, while others, with thoughts
of chill days to come, are busily searching out every cranny for a
morsel of food, mere atoms against the huge, lofty trunks. Blue-jays
are indulging in their usual pilfering, making more noise than all the
rest of the forest folk combined. Insects also seem unusually active.
Happy, gauzy-winged bits of concentrated gayety, they while away their
little hours in the mellowed sunshine. Giving no thought to the frosts
and short days to come, transitory and carefree, they offer the most
tragic contrasts, dancing and humming about the immortal Sequoia.

When winter comes and all is in keeping with the great sleep of the
forest, it is blossom time for the Sequoia. For everything else the
beauty of life’s expansion is ended. The pines have become funereal
in their aspect; the firs have lost their gayety. The underbrush,
bowed with the weight of snow, is stripped of its bright leaves. Sear
and brown, they lie heaped in hollows where the wailing Autumn winds
left them. The flowers, too, are in their graves. The robins are
gone. Even streams are silent and buried. But the Sequoia, living an
almost enchanted existence, is quite beyond reach of every influence
suggestive of winter’s repose. Though all life about it may cease, it
must blossom forth. Producing myriads of minute flowers at the ends of
branches formed the previous year, it fairly bursts into bloom, dusting
the snowy ground, like a gigantic goldenrod, with golden pollen.

Contrasting the prolific abundance of Sequoia seeds with the scarcity
of seedlings, it seems logical to conclude that the Sequoia is not
reproducing. It is true that seedlings are rare in the northern groves,
although seed production there is as great as elsewhere. This has been
construed as evidence that the seeds are infertile and bears out the
sad prophecy of Asa Gray that the Sequoia is a wan and weary survivor
of the Age of Reptiles and has that inferiority about it of all
things that go back into the past. Tainted with antiquity, it is
supposedly losing its power of reproduction.

[Illustration: ALABAMA TREE, A PERFECT SEQUOIA

  MARIPOSA GROVE        Photo by A. C. Pillsbury]

The southern groves, however, throw quite a different light upon the
question. There reproduction is manifest on every hand. Companies of
seedlings are springing up everywhere determined to carry on the noble
line. They are found growing not alone in moist glens where the soil is
rich and deep, but also on rocky ledges and steep hillsides seemingly
bare of all nutriment, some even battling for life with their roots
wedged in crevices of granite beds. Exuberant and heavy with an output
of green foliage, these monarchs of the future promise anything but an
inability to maintain the forest in its most perfect vigor.

The fact that the Sequoias in the northern part of their range show
lack of reproduction is not due to a loss of viability of their seeds,
but to other causes. Wherever the thick layer of leaf mould is stripped
away exposing the mineral soil and the proper amount of sunlight is
sifted down, plantations of thrifty seedlings promise renewal of the
race. But where the overhead shade is unbroken and the litter on the
forest floor undisturbed, the seedling succumbs long before its tiny
roots can reach down through the decaying vegetable matter to the
soil beneath. In the southern groves where the ravages of the lumber
mill and fire have been extensive enough to open up the dense shade,
tearing the ground and baring it to the sunlight, the Sequoia has
displayed an admirable ability to seed over the desolated areas. But in
the northern groves where sunlight and soil conditions are unfavorable
to the development of seedlings, reproduction is practically at a
standstill.

In the Calaveras Grove Sudworth found a few seedlings “where storm
had made an opening in the forest and a ground fire had exposed a
little mineral soil. Apparently good use had been made of the first
opportunity for reproduction,” he goes on to state, “for young big
trees were vigorous in the full enjoyment of the sun.” The same may be
said to be true of the Mariposa Grove. Reproduction, as a whole, is
always evident when proper conditions obtain, for numberless seedlings
may be found growing on spots bared of the forest litter and open to
the sun. With continued protection these bid fair to replace the old
giants of the present.

It is also of interest to note that seedlings are the exception
throughout the Redwood belt. This is not due to sterility of the
seeds, but to the same causes which have conspired in Big Tree forests
to prevent reproduction. The dense shade and the heavy ground litter
present conditions most unfavorable to germination. Indeed, were it not
for the Redwood’s unique habit of sprouting shoots from stumps and old
roots, they, too, would be as completely splendid in their poverty of
young trees as the northern groves of the Giant Sequoia.

The causes, then, of the death of seedlings, especially in the northern
parts of the Sequoia’s range, are not, as was first commonly supposed,
due to the drying out of the climate, the loss in vitality of the race,
or the fact that the Sequoias are being vanquished by competitive and
more lusty species. Given favorable soil and light conditions the tree
“still possesses that strong inherent reproductive power that permits
survival of the fit.”

It is true that the Sequoia has not extended its range since
post-glacial time. If it has, the monuments of its extension have
remained no more enduring than those left by departed bees and
butterflies, for in the gaps between the Sequoia groves, not a
root-hole or a trench made by a falling giant has been discovered. The
fact that such records are well nigh imperishable, taken in conjunction
with their abundant presence in the groves themselves, led John Muir to
conclude that their absence outside is indicative of the non-extension
of the species beyond its present limits since the glacial period that
gave the Sierras their aspect of savage grandeur. Before this epoch,
however, it is believed that the Sequoia extended in an unbroken belt
along the Sierra and that the present-day gaps mark the paths of these
great ice rivers. In fact, wherever the glaciers once wore their bodies
into the canyons, the Sequoia is found wanting. And though the tree
has not re-united its broken clusters, it has held its own ground
against rival species. John Muir took this as evidence that the Sequoia
exhibited no decadence since the glacial period.

The unequivocal conclusion to be drawn from these facts is that the
Sequoia is in no danger of extinction. It has not lost the original
hardihood of its race. Nor is the present but the epilogue of the
imposing part it has played in the past—it is the augury of a yet more
splendid future awaiting a race whose ancestors reach back into the
borderland of the forgotten ages.




                               PART THREE

                          Naming _the_ Sequoia


                             +Chapter VIII+

                          A NAME FOR THE AGES


The infinite deal of trivial fussiness that has clustered about
the botanical name of the Giant Sequoia is, indeed, a grievous
misfortune. The tree must regard it all with consummate unconcern.
Alone with the past and having a dignity not of earth in its mien
it stands as indifferent to agitation that has to do with the petty
passions of humanity as the far-away patient stars. Suggestive of
no strife save that of emulation, it looks with complacent disdain
upon life’s vanities; its strange medley of littleness and greatness,
its commingling of folly and wisdom. Yet for all the great Sequoia’s
majestic aloofness, its name has become embroiled in endless bickerings
and surrounded with technicalities apt to nip any budding enthusiasm
for botanical nomenclature.

In order to avoid interminable confusion it is necessary that the
plants of the earth be systematically classified and that there be no
deviation from the rules governing their classification. Foremost of
the rules that have been laid down is that of priority. This dictates
that the first name given a new plant in point of time must prevail.
If contention or ambiguity arise, priority decides the case, and the
first botanical designation bestowed stands for all time, regardless
of whether it be appropriate or not. Designations of a subsequent date
are entitled to rank as synonyms only. Because of its rigor, this law
should admonish botanists to exercise good taste in giving scientific
names to hitherto unnamed plants. Another important rule is that
the name of the new plant must appear in an accredited publication,
otherwise it is technically regarded as unpublished and consequently
discarded.

Shortly after the discovery of the Calaveras Grove, the tale of its
wonderful Big Trees found its way into print. The Sonora _Herald_
appears to have been the first newspaper to give an account of the
Giant Sequoia. This was republished in the _Echo du Pacific_ of San
Francisco, appearing later in the London _Athenaeum_ of July 23, 1853.
Whitney believes the latter to be the first notice of the tree to
appear in Europe.

Naturally, these accounts excited botanists. Specimens of the Big Tree
were presented to the California Academy of Sciences in San Francisco
early in 1853. Unfortunately, however, the Academy was unable to
properly describe the new plant, since it had no references on hand
which would enable its botanists to publish a proper scientific
description of the mammoth tree. Specimens were subsequently sent East
to Torrey and Gray, but again ill fortune attended them and they were
lost in crossing the Isthmus of Panama. Meanwhile, William Lobb, an
English seed collector, on seeing specimens of the recently discovered
vegetable wonder, believed he recognized a species new to science.
He secured a sufficient quantity of Sequoia cones, foliage, and wood
to characterize the tree and departed for England in the Autumn of
1853. These specimens found their way into the hands of Lindley, who
hastily described them in Gardner’s _Chronicle_ of December 24th, of
the same year. Thus Lindley, a botanist of no particular eminence, was
the first to give a scientific description of the Giant Sequoia, and
American botanists lost both the opportunity and honor of naming a very
remarkable plant.

Overlooking the close relationship of the Big Tree to the already
scientifically described Redwood, Lindley considered it “an entirely
new coniferous form ... an evergreen of a most imperial aspect,” which
he called _Wellingtonia_, adding the specific name of _Gigantea_. The
Duke of Wellington had been dead but a year and his greatness had
not yet gained the perspective of historical time; hence, Lindley’s
designation. “We think,” he wrote, “that no one will differ from us in
feeling that the most appropriate name to be proposed for the most
gigantic tree which has been revealed to us by modern discovery, is
that of the greatest of modern heroes. Wellington stands as high above
his contemporaries as the California tree above all the surrounding
foresters. Let it, then, bear henceforth the name of _Wellingtonia
Gigantea_.”

In bestowing on an essentially American tree the name of an essentially
English hero, Lindley showed execrable taste. He might have foreseen
that such an act was almost certain to fire those who felt a consuming
contempt for anything British. Promptly the fine rules of botanical
nomenclature were thrown overboard, and Americans, eager to make a
self-righteous display of their enmity, proceeded on no principles, and
with terrible energy of language, to disturb the designation. Gradually
the agitation centered upon changing the name _Wellingtonia_ to one
bearing reference to Washington. Nor was any evidence brought forward
considered too trivial to substantiate the reasons for this change.

Perhaps the most withering rebuke of all was that of Winslow. In the
_California Farmer_ of August, 1854, appeared the following: ... “as
Washington and his generation declared themselves independent of all
English rule and political dictation, so American naturalists must, in
this case, express their respectful dissent from all British scientific
stamp acts. If the Big Tree be a _Taxodium_, let it be called now and
forever _Taxodium Washingtonium_.... No name can be more appropriate;
and if, in accordance with the views of American botanists, I trust
the scientific honor of our country may be vindicated from foreign
indelicacy by boldly discarding the name now applied to it, and by
affixing to it that of the immortal man whose memory we all love, and
honor, and teach our children to adore.”

Even Asa Gray felt entitled to rush into the field. In September of the
same year he published, on his own authority, an account stating that
the Redwood and the Big Tree did not differ sufficiently to warrant the
establishment of a new genus; adding “The so-called _Wellingtonia_ will
hereafter bear the name imposed by Dr. Torrey, namely, that of _Sequoia
Gigantea_.” But since there is no documentary evidence to show that
Torrey had published this description, the quibble remained unsettled.
The English stood at their guns and the storm raged on. Surely, if so
venerable a Sequoia as the Grizzly Giant could have been endowed with
a consciousness and could have thought about this ostentatious parade
of pettiness, it would not have been inspired with that “high and
ennobling sense” of the intellectual destiny of the human race.

Happily, the issue was quieted for a time.[6] At a meeting of the
Société Botanique de France, held on June 28, 1854, the illustrious
French botanist, J. Decaisne, discussed at length the relationship
of the Redwood and the Big Tree. He pointed out that though they
differed in leaf structure, the former having yew-like leaves in two
ranks, the latter small, scaly, cypress-like leaves in regular spirals,
the two species belonged to the same genus _Sequoia_. Therefore, in
compliance with the rules of botany, he called the new species _Sequoia
Gigantea_. Other botanists quickly recognized the correctness of his
view, and _Wellingtonia Gigantea_ was permitted to fall upon evil days.
Nevertheless, it is due to this accident of the generic agreement
between the Redwood and the Big Tree that the Giants of the Sierra bear
the name of Sequoia instead of that of Wellington.

But this botanical storm had no sooner died down than another developed
in its place. Inasmuch as the derivation of the name Sequoia was
uncertain, this was sufficient provocation to call forth much diversity
of opinion. Again spectacled wise men sought to satisfy their passion
for exactness and their propensity to doubt. Guesses fantastic in the
extreme were advanced and the subject presents another silly spectacle
of pedantry.

According to Jepson, the Redwood was collected by Thaddeus Haneke in
1791. Archibald Menzies, a member of the famous Vancouver Expedition,
is reputed to be its second botanical collector. Specimens of his
collection came before the notice of Lambert, the able English
botanist, who, considering it as of the same genus as the Bald
Cypress, published it in 1824 as _Taxodium Sempervirens_. However, this
designation was not allowed to stand, for twenty-three years later
the Redwood was recognized as a distinct genus. In the year 1847 the
celebrated Austrian, Endlicher, established the genus _Sequoia_ and
gave the world the now well-known _Sequoia sempervirens_.

Unfortunately, Endlicher failed to make a statement concerning the
origin of the word Sequoia, leaving its meaning to be inferred. Gordon
in his _Pinetum_ stated that it was probably derived from the Latin
for “sequence,” alluding to the fact that the Redwood was “a follower
or remnant of several extinct colossal species.” Kotch was inclined to
hold the name in light estimation, claiming its source to be entirely
fanciful. De Candolle, a contemporary with Endlicher, thought it of
California origin, probably taken “from some native word and written
more or less correctly.” But others have kept their heads better in the
matter. Both Hooker and Englemann believed it derived from the Cherokee
Indian, Sequoyah. At least, it is edifying to know that Endlicher was
an eminent linguist as well as a botanist. It is not improbable, then,
that he was acquainted with Sequoyah’s colorful career and named the
tree in honor of this aboriginal illiterate, this magnificent savage,
who groped in darkness to give his people letters, and found the light.




                              +Chapter IX+

                                SEQUOYAH


Had Sequoyah lived thirty centuries ago, Plutarch, and after him
Shakespeare, would have made him immortal. Had he invented an alphabet
then, similar to that which he invented for his people, the Cherokees,
he would have been hailed as one of the benefactors of the human
race. But as it is, the world’s knowledge concerning his achievement
may be said to sleep. The records of his life are hidden from the
average reader, while his fame is suffering the fate of many worthy of
antiquity—perishing from memory for want of an historian. Already the
twilight of uncertainty is throwing its shadows across his history.

Yet no savage is more worthy of remembrance. The life of Sequoyah was
radiant with the prime quality of greatness—_virtue_. It is true that
mankind admires the men and women of the past who have spoken great
words, done great deeds, and suffered noble sorrows. Few of these,
however, possess that quality of virtue which inspires emulation.
Indeed, only those whose names are written in gold on the sombre
chronicles of the past inspire to imitation. Sequoyah’s achievement
easily entitles him a place among the great characters of all time,
while his life of service stirs a strong desire to emulate, for he
strove to save his unhappy race from extinction in the noblest way a
savage ever sought.

Despite this, his name and fame go untrumpeted and unsung. Meanwhile
mankind is frantically fashioning statues to rest idly on pedestals, or
building magnificent edifices whose marbles glisten in the sunlight,
in commemoration of men of frailer virtue. Yet Sequoyah’s name is
borne by apartment houses and tomato cans. Apparently it remains for
the most gigantic and remarkable tree on the surface of the globe, the
Sequoia, to save his name from oblivion and to attempt to correct the
indifference of a so-called superior race.

Authorities are agreed that the birth, breeding, and fortune of
Sequoyah were low and that his greatness rested on a life of labor.
They are in disagreement, however, as to the date and place of his
birth, and have been able merely to offer conjectures concerning his
parentage. These mists of uncertainty that surround Sequoyah’s earliest
years are, undoubtedly, due to conditions of early frontier life.

The fur trader, who represented the outer edge of the advancing wave
of European civilization, was the first to penetrate the American
wilderness in his exploitation of beasts. Early in the settlement of
America he entered the country of the Cherokee which then embraced the
beautiful reaches of the southern Appalachians. The Cherokees received
the trader with hospitality and kindness, and a lucrative traffic in
furs soon resulted; the trader offering professions of regard and
extracting exorbitant profits. To better secure the faith of the
savage, thereby insuring the success of their venture, many of these
traders married Cherokee women. Some, fascinated by this wild life of
freedom, reverted to savagery and became “squaw men,” but the great
majority adopted this method of wife-taking to avoid a bill for board
and lodging, and then speedily disappeared as soon as their trading
enterprise was over.

An episode of this nature occurred just prior to the termination of
the French and Indian War. Of the married life of this couple there
is little record. It is quite certain, however, that it was of short
duration and that the trader concerned gathered together his effects
and went the lighthearted way of other traders before him, and was
never heard of again. The babe born to this deserted mother soon
afterwards was called by the Cherokees George Gist, presumably the
name of the father, while the mother bestowed upon the infant the more
musical name of Sequoyah.

Tradition has it that the mother of Sequoyah was a woman of no common
character and energy. To the end she remained true to her faithless
husband and lived alone, maintaining herself by her own efforts and
caring for her babe with a devotion that would put many of her
more polished sisters to shame. Unaided, she cleared a little patch,
carrying her babe about while she broke the ground with a short stick
and planted it with Indian corn. “That she is a woman of some capacity
is evident from the undeviating affections for herself which she
inspired in her son, and the influence she exercised over him. This
is all the more extraordinary since Indian women are looked upon in
the light of servants rather than companions of man, and males are
taught early to despise the character and occupations of women.” But
with Sequoyah it seems to have been otherwise, for he carried a lofty
respect for his mother to the grave.

[Illustration: SEQUOYAH

  From original painting made in 1828]

As a babe, it is said that Sequoyah had an air of infantile gravity
about him which was emphasized by a contemplative light which shone
in his little black eyes. As a boy he was much alone and thoughtful,
having no fondness for the rude sports of others of his age. He
preferred to assist his mother rather than to become proficient with
the bow. It is said that he occupied his boyish leisure carving milk
pails, skimmers, and other useful objects, displaying at this early age
the mechanical side of his genius. He even milked the few cows with
which fortune had favored his mother, and on occasions aided her in her
labors in the field. This failure to scorn a woman’s pursuit and trim
his sail to the unchanging breeze of Indian tradition only brought
down on him a torrent of abuse from grey-beards and caused youths to
rail at him like chattering birds. Young Sequoyah, however, calmly and
silently bore all this disgrace and followed the dictates of his reason
with unflinching gravity—a characteristic he displayed throughout his
life and which some hold as the keystone of his greatness.

When Sequoyah attained manhood’s estate, the Thirteen Colonies had won
their independence, and Daniel Boone had led the first settlers into
the blue grass country of the Cumberland. In these times the English,
French, and Spanish hotly vied with each other for the control of
the valuable fur trade of the “Old Southwest,” and their pack-trains
threaded their way out of Cherokee country in unceasing strings,
bearing the rich peltry of the wilderness. In this work of destruction
of wild life the Indian had innocently come to play, by far, the major
role. Nor is it altogether improbable that Sequoyah, who by now had
become a hunter, aided in the extermination of the buffalo that still
lingered in the valleys of the Ohio and the Tennessee.

It is also likely that Sequoyah would not have escaped the degradation
into which the red man was falling had not an accident befallen him
while hunting which rendered him a cripple for the rest of his life.
The coming of the rifle, a new and powerful sinew of war, and of the
chase, brought in its train a hopeless dependence on unscrupulous
traders for powder and lead. The introduction of whiskey further
conspired in the ruin of a proud people. Drinking had become the pledge
of cordiality on the frontier, and Sequoyah had become as much addicted
to the vice as his fellow hunters. Later events proved that Sequoyah
possessed an intellect elevated above the sphere in which it was
placed. Had he not become a cripple, however, it is doubtful whether
he would have meditated upon the decaying fortunes of his race, which
meditation led him to make his remarkable invention. Thus, paradoxical
as it may at first appear, misfortune often precipitates a chain of
events that ultimately end in accomplishment of great import.

Unable to follow the pursuits of manhood, Sequoyah now faced the
humiliation of donning petticoats and of performing the servile labors
of woman’s lot among the Cherokees. Such a prospect would, indeed,
have broken the spirit of an ordinary Indian, and especially so if a
stain had been affixed to his character such as that which Sequoyah
had incurred in his youth by assisting his mother. But it must be
remembered that Sequoyah was not of common clay. The traits manifested
in infancy and boyhood now stood him in good stead and opportunity was
given to bring them to fruition. One trait, an extraordinary mechanical
ability, was first pressed into service; the other, a remarkably
analytical and philosophical mind, was given leisure in which to
become mellow, until, in the ripeness of time, it should find its
proper exercise.

The Cherokees were a people fond of display. It occurred to the
intuitive mind of Sequoyah that an opulent livelihood could be secured
in the manufacture of silver ornaments. As a hunter he had visited the
white settlements and had seen the blacksmiths smelt ore and fashion
trinkets. Endowed with good powers of observation and possessed of
an innate skill with his hands, he set to work without the aid of an
instructor to make his own bellows and tools. Within a comparatively
brief time he became a master in the art of silver working and in the
end became such an expert artisan that he developed this art to the
highest point attained by the Indians of North America.

Astonished, his people came to gaze upon one of their own race who
possessed the skill and ingenuity of the white man. Such uncommon
accomplishment merited high recognition. He became a wonder in their
eyes. The fame of his handiwork spread far and near, and they flocked
to his door, eager to give him employment. Then it was that Sequoyah
began to enjoy an unprecedented popularity. Affable, accommodating,
and unassuming, having a nature too truly great to be spoiled by the
recognition of his superiority, success only nourished the greater
qualities within him. The women especially attracted by his skill,
bestowed their smiles upon him, but, like Alexander, “he found a
counter charm in the beauty of self-government and sobriety and on the
strength of this passed them by, as so many statues.” The braves of the
tribe likewise courted his friendship and his shop became the center
for male gossip. Since Sequoyah was not lacking in the social graces
of his tribe and since the munificence of his table increased with his
fortune, he came more and more to spend his time in receiving visitors
and in discharging the duties of hospitality. Lastly, even the elders
of the tribe sought his favor and welcomed his voice in their councils.

Wishing to identify his wares, Sequoyah employed a literate half-breed,
Charles Hicks, to write his name, from which he made a die. With this
he stamped his name on all the silver he fabricated. Many of these
ornaments remain in the proud possession of the scattered and forgotten
remnants of the Cherokees. Prized beyond price, they are a reminder
of the glory of the past. Just as the crumbling ruins of antiquity
speak of the pride and pomp of yesterday, so do these treasured silver
objects remind their possessors of the Golden Age of the Cherokee.

As the years went on, Sequoyah’s philosophical nature ripened and
he came to ponder on the future of his fast dwindling race. This
problem was probably first brought to his attention during the social
gatherings held under his roof, for the Cherokees were sensitive to
the superiority of civilized man and quick to note the cardinal
points of difference between themselves and the whites. Often they had
wondered at the ability of the white man to “talk on paper.” But after
considerable inquiry they became convinced that the power of recording
and communicating thoughts by means of writing was the product of some
mysterious gift which the white man alone possessed. Nevertheless,
Sequoyah was unable to dismiss the problem as lightly from his mind as
his brethren had done. It was odious to Luther that the devil had all
the best tunes; likewise it was odious to Sequoyah that the white man
should have a monopoly on the power of written expression. At length
he decided that writing was not the result of sorcery, but a faculty
of the mind which could be acquired. Hence, he concluded that he could
solve this mystery and give his people “talking paper” like that of the
whites.

His reflections on this problem were further stimulated by the
progress of events. The day of the trader had passed, while that of
the settler had come. The swelling tide from Europe had settled around
the Cherokees, and the frontier of settlement had begun to continually
spill over into the Cherokee country. What was even more maddening,
encroachments were on the increase and held no promise of abating.
At last in despair, the Cherokees appealed to the “Great Father” in
Washington to stem the tide. A treaty followed, clipping away a
goodly portion of their ancestral domain. The ink on it was hardly dry
before another wrested from them still more thousands of acres of rich
land. In each treaty the Federal Government recognized the Cherokee
claims and titles and solemnly declared it to be “the last and final
adjustment of all claims and differences.” Obviously, the Cherokees
were shocked by these acts of treachery. The fact that the hand of the
“Great Father” was gloved and that it purported to throw continual
favors in their path did not make them less apprehensive of the menace.
Yet they were convinced of the folly of an appeal to arms through a
realization of the inequality of the struggle. Therefore, they did that
which no other Indian tribe in the face of calamity has ever done. They
attempted to combat civilization by becoming civilized themselves. At a
great council they organized themselves to form a Federal Union after
the United States, and set to cultivating the arts of peace and the
ways of civilization.

By this time Sequoyah had become imbued with the idea that the secret
of the white man’s superiority lay in his power of communication by
writing. Indeed, he struck a salient note here, for the invention
of writing has made tremendously for the superior advantages of
the civilized races over the primitive. “The mind and the pen have
ultimately, in all ages, been mightier than the sword. Rome, the
conquerer, was led in chains by Greece, who, though herself over-run
by barbaric Romans, compelled them to adopt, respect, and maintain her
institutions.” History, in fact, is replete with instances of people
who have been able to ward off the effects of conquest because they
were intellectually above their victors. But this superiority has
always preceded conquest; it has _never_ followed it. Unfortunately,
Sequoyah was ignorant of this. Nevertheless, the mere fact that such an
ideal had its birth in the mind of an untutored savage is sufficient to
vest it with sublimity.

Inspired with the thought of saving his people from conquest by giving
them the power of the pen, he took up his great work at the age of
forty-nine, in the last year of Jefferson’s Presidency. Ceasing his
labors as a silversmith, he began carving strange characters out of
bark and spending hours wrapped in thought. His fellow tribesmen were
unable to understand his singular behavior. They thought it but the
work of madness for their great silversmith to lay aside his hammer
and bellows, to quit his social circle, and of a sudden to become
seclusive. Sequoyah, however, refused to reveal his secret, knowing
full well the attitude of his fellow tribesmen in regard to the
impossibility of discovering a supposedly supernatural power of the
whites. His popularity suffered a quick decline, and his friends fell
away like leaves from Autumn trees attempting to justify their actions
by scoffing and sneering. Then Sequoyah began to taste in full
measure the vinegar of derision and to learn that gratitude is but a
lively sense of favors to come. Notwithstanding, he preserved the usual
calm behavior and serenity of mind that had attended him from infancy,
always turning from the storm without to the sunshine of hope within
him. And after twelve years—years of persevering labor and repeated
failure—years of ridicule in which his faith in his people must have
been sorely tried—he perfected his remarkable invention of the Cherokee
Alphabet.

[Illustration: THE INVINCIBLE SEQUOIA

  The large fire-made cavity in the Haverford suggests the tree’s
  great vitality

  MARIPOSA GROVE        Photo by H. S. Hoyt]

It is a notable fact that the great works of the imagination have
usually been produced by men nearly innocent of schooling and
scholarship. Homer, Shakespeare, Cervantes, Burns, and Abraham Lincoln
were all self-taught men. Sequoyah was an absolute illiterate, yet
he invented an alphabet. He had no acquaintanceship with the English
language, for he disdained the aid of missionaries, and for this reason
the most elemental principles of our alphabet were unknown to him. He
reasoned, and with no little correctness, that a knowledge of English
would be of no avail because of the peculiarities of the Cherokee
language. With his own unaided intellect he fashioned a syllabary so
extraordinary that it astonishes even the learned, and proved himself
a mental giant. Evidently he did not recognize the stops of the human
mind, which is almost wholly imitative. Indeed, some of his biographers
are unwilling to give him this honor, claiming that his invention
was not altogether free from borrowing. But for all that, there are
still those who hold that Bacon wrote that which is attributed to
Shakespeare. Because man shows an extreme poverty throughout the
history of invention, because he rarely tries to do over again that
which has been once accomplished, and because he is quicker to grasp
and more capable of appropriating, independent inventions are the
exception rather than the rule. It must be conceded, in all fairness,
that Sequoyah’s syllabary was an invention “par excellence.”

Having first conceived the notion that speech could be represented by
characters or signs and that if these signs were uniform they would
convey the idea intended by the writer, he set out to devise a symbol
for each word or idea of the Cherokee tongue. His first step, in other
words, was in the direction of the simple pictograph. As the experiment
progressed, however, his symbols multiplied fearfully, until, at the
end of three years he had thousands of them. It would have been almost
impossible for the human mind to retain such a complex multitude of
signs. Happily, Sequoyah had a sufficient sense of the practical to
realize this. Hence, he abandoned this experiment and started again by
making a study of the construction of language itself.

Even a people as cultivated as the Chinese have never made the next
stride which Sequoyah took. The Chinese still employ the lowest stage
of writing in all its absurd prolixity with the result that long years
of study and a memory above the average are required for its mastery.
This is largely the reason, too, why intellectual democracy is so
noticeably absent in China. The Chinese language is too elaborate
in structure, too laborious in use, and too inflexible in form to
thoroughly saturate China’s teeming millions and to meet the need of a
simple, swift, and lucid communication of thought. Our alphabet, on the
other hand, answers these requirements. “It is because the Egyptians
passed into the glory of the true alphabet that the Phoenicians
simplified and improved it, and that the Greeks were able to transmit
it to occidental civilization that western nations have been able to
make such tremendous mental progress and established such a wide and
common knowledge.” It is quite obvious that Sequoyah was not blundering
when he discarded his pictograph system if he would achieve his ideal.

After long and patient study he began a search for the unity of speech.
At length he discovered that _sound_ was the key in the construction
of language. Then by attentive listening for another period he
discovered that the sounds in the words spoken by the Cherokees could
be analyzed and classified and could be represented by hardly more
than a hundred syllables. Further analysis revealed two distinct types
of sounds, vowels and consonants. Classifying the sounds according
to this division, he found that there were six vowel and seventy-two
consonant sounds. Thirty-seven sounds still remained unclassified.
By dint of further analysis he found that these were of a hissing or
guttural nature. In an ingenious way he represented the former by seven
combinations and the latter by one. As a result, in this expeditious
manner he was able to write a copious language vastly wealthier in its
vocabulary than ours, with but eighty-five characters.

The best authorities are agreed that our alphabet is, in some respects,
the greatest invention of the human mind. Yet it is not the product of
a single mind, but the accretion of Egyptian, Phoenician, and Greek
wisdom extending over a period of at least three thousand years.
Excellent as our alphabet is, it fails to outrank that of Sequoyah in
point of felicity and ease of mastery. Ours is superior in that it
goes to the unit of speech, _sound_, and has characters that stand for
sound. Sequoyah’s alphabet had characters that stood for combinations
of sounds or syllables. Our alphabet is the only sound-for-a-sign
system of writing yet invented. It is an alphabet of letters, while
that of Sequoyah was an alphabet of syllables. James Mooney claims that
it ranks second to all systems of writing ever known to the world.
It certainly could not have been the work of other than a gigantic
intellect.

It was not without considerable difficulty that Sequoyah induced a few
skeptical and superstitious Cherokees to learn his alphabet after he
had completed it in 1811. These few who were the first to try it out
did so merely to expose the delusions of the alphabet-maker, but as the
lesson progressed, though they had come to scoff, they began to admire
until, finally, when the lesson was finished they were convinced that
the seemingly impossible had been achieved—that the Cherokees could
“talk on paper” like the whites. This time Sequoyah’s rise to fame was
meteoric. News of his invention spread like wildfire throughout the
tribe, and, at a public test made before the assembled Houses of the
Cherokee Congress, his alphabet was officially adopted as the means of
elevating the tribe. Sequoyah had become the Cadmus[7] of his nation.

Then occurred a spectacle without a parallel among primitive people;
that of gray-bearded savages studying in groups with unfettered zeal
in order to become the equal of the white man in knowledge. Almost
overnight the entire nation became an academy. To be able to read and
write became a craze with the Cherokees. Never was Plato’s fine phrase
of a people being “possessed and maddened with a passion for knowledge”
better exemplified. Mass meetings in abundance were held and the new
method of “talking on paper” was taught virtually wholesale. It was
even common to see groups teaching each other in cabins and along
the roadside. “Within a few months thousands of formerly illiterate
savages, without the aid of schools or the expense of time or money,
could read and write.” In fact, by the time the Monroe Doctrine was
promulgated in 1813, reading and writing had become so general among
the Cherokees that “they carried on a correspondence by letter between
different parts of the nation and were in the habit of making receipts
and giving promissory notes in affairs of trade. Directions were even
inscribed on trees indicating the different roads.”

This is manifest evidence of the ease with which Sequoyah’s syllabary
was learned. “In my own observation,” states Phillips, “Indian children
will take one or two years to master the English printed and written
language, but in a few days can read and write in Cherokee. They do
the latter, in fact, as soon as they learn to shape letters. As soon
as they master the alphabet they have got rid of all the perplexing
questions that puzzle the brains of our children. It is not too much to
say that a child will learn in a month by the same effort as thoroughly
in the language of Sequoyah that which in ours consumes the time of our
children for at least two years.”

Sequoyah next paid a visit to the Arkansas Cherokees. This band had
separated from the main body when the Cherokees decided to combat
civilization with civilization and had moved west where they could
enjoy the ancient ways of their ancestors. Though this body had spurned
all civilized innovations and had clung slavishly to tradition,
strangely enough, they readily seized the new art Sequoyah brought with
him and learned it with a zest that almost put their eastern brethren
in the shade.

In the Autumn of this same year, 1823, the Cherokee Council publicly
acknowledged Sequoyah’s service to the nation by sending him through
their President, the noted John Ross, a silver medal commemorative of
his achievement. So highly had the Cherokees come to esteem Sequoyah’s
greatness that five years later they elected him to represent them
in Washington. There he was cordially received and recognized as an
intellectual peer. On this occasion he sat for his portrait. The Treaty
of Washington of 1828 reveals that he still enjoyed high favor from the
Government, for it provided for a sum to be paid to Sequoyah and his
heirs “for the great benefits he has conferred upon the Cherokee people
in the beneficial results they are now experiencing from the use of the
alphabet discovered by him.” It is worthy to note that for many years
the Government paid this pension—_the only literary pension it has ever
paid_.

The Cherokees had now passed into a state of semi-civilization. They
had a National Congress which had passed laws against intemperance
and polygamy. They had a national press and a national newspaper, the
_Cherokee Phoenix_. The first copy of this unique paper appeared on
February 18, 1828. It was printed in both English and Cherokee by a
hand press which had been purchased in Boston, shipped by water to
Augusta, Georgia, and then transported laboriously by wagon over two
hundred miles to the Cherokee national capital. Such a journalistic
record is without rival in primitive society, and the _Cherokee
Phoenix_ holds the honor of being the father of all aboriginal
newspapers.

Rapid strides, economically as well as politically and intellectually,
had been made. Many Cherokees had amassed considerable wealth and
enjoyed some of the refinements and luxuries of a more polished
society. The majority of them possessed herds of cattle, together
with horses, hogs, and sheep. Husbandry was so efficiently practiced
that some products were actually exported, as evidenced by the large
cargoes of wheat and tobacco that were floated on flat-boats down
the Tennessee to New Orleans. The manufacture of woolen and cotton
cloth had even assumed a productiveness permitting of exportation. In
short, prosperity was on the boom and everything augured well for the
Cherokees’ happy attainment of civilization.

But fate had willed it otherwise. The Cherokees had reached the zenith
of their advance. Gold was discovered in their domain in 1829. This
event led to dishonorable deeds of the white man and gave the annals
of American-Indian history another black page. In their rapacity, the
border ruffians of Georgia violated the sacredness of treaties and with
a vicious disregard for the rights of their legal owners, appropriated
by violence the rich lands of the Cherokees. Gradually all the fine
achievements of these splendid savages melted into thin air. When the
United States Supreme Court decreed that the misappropriated Cherokee
lands be returned to their rightful owners, President Jackson, a
frontiersman and an Indian hater, defied its authority with his famous
rebuke, “John Marshall has made his decision, now let him enforce
it.” Finally, after nearly nine years of agitation and disquietude,
negotiations with the Government ended in the Ridge Treaty, an infamous
concoction which was brazenly sustained. By its means the remaining
fragment of what was once the Cherokee Nation were exiled at the point
of the bayonet to a country beyond the Mississippi.

Unfortunately, the new home allotted to the Cherokees proved to be
inhospitable. The land was claimed by the Osage as their ancestral
hunting ground, and the already impoverished Cherokees had to hold it
by force of arms. Nor were the Osage the sole authors of their woes.
The Arkansas band resented this intrusion of their eastern brethren.
Fratricidal war broke out and the tribe became further wasted. Warred
on from without, and torn by strife within, the Cherokees, as a people,
were in danger of extinction. Foreseeing this end, Sequoyah and others
attempted to avert it. As President of the Council of the Arkansas
band, he was largely instrumental in effecting a reunion which put an
end to strife and declared the Eastern and Western Cherokee “one body
politic under the style and title of the Cherokee Nation.”

Sequoyah was by this time in his eighty-second year and well merited
the boon of rest and relaxation. Lest he leave no margin to his life
and crowd it to the very end in his devotion to his people, he retired
from active political life. But his forceful mind denied his crippled
and aged body the rest it deserved. Speculative ideas possessed him and
he formulated a theory that he could devise a universal alphabet for
the red man. Under the dominion of this newer and deeper ambition he
came to feel that he had yet a mission to perform. Though his people
had suffered an excess of calamity, his spirit was unbroken. Having
sounded the depths of human disappointment, he rose again, full of
courage and faith in the salvation of his race. Not in the habit of
taking the advice of others and not having lost one jot of his most
distinguishing characteristic—intensity of purpose—he determined to
make an investigation among the remote tribes of the West in search of
some common element of speech.

Securing a few articles of Indian trade and loading these on an ox cart
driven by a Cherokee boy, Sequoyah set out upon his last quest in 1843.
Such a linguistic crusade the world will doubtless never again witness.
Everywhere he was received by his red-skinned brothers of the plain and
of the mountain with the utmost respect. Eagerly they furnished him
with the means of prosecuting his inquiries. That reticence which they
so notoriously displayed to Caucasian scientists was absent. Nor is
this to be wondered at, for here was a scientist of their own race who
had come to renown and they rested assured that he came not among them
to discover their inferiorities or to prepare the way for exploitation.

With his boy companion he crossed the boundless plains, and, like
Kipling’s _Explorer_, “hurried on in hope of water or turned back in
search of grass.” Puzzling his way through the Rockies, he camped in
meadows of softest velvet sweet with flowers, or above the tree line
amid the grandeur of frost shattered peaks and perpetual snows. Then
turning toward that scorched and waterless expanse unrelieved by the
shade of a solitary tree, he crossed the Colorado Desert and entered
the Mexican Sierras. Here, it is said, his boy companion died of
exposure and hardship, and somewhere in the silent places of these
desolate mountains this grand old man buried the lone partner of his
wanderings.

An ancient myth current in the lodges of his forefathers told of a lost
band of Cherokees who had wandered ages ago into northern Mexico. Vexed
by chilling frosts and scorching heat, Sequoyah began a search for his
lost kinsmen. Enfeebled of limb and yet strong of heart, he pursued
his solitary way, ever straining toward the distant horizon to find
what might be beyond. But he had over-estimated his strength, and not
far from the Rio Grande, in the State of Tamaulipas, this “splendid
wayfarer” reached the end of his trail and watched with fast-dimming
eyes the pearl-gray smoke of his last camp-fire curl toward the heavens
as he drew nearer to eternity.

The greatest of his race, Sequoyah sleeps beyond the Rio Grande. No
monument marks the last resting place of this American Cadmus. His
bones, denied the privilege of sepulchre, were picked by slinking
wolves and wheeling buzzards, and left to bleach in the sun until the
winds had buried them in the sands. His alphabet, too, is destined to
pass away with his race, but his name will never pass into oblivion,
for it is borne by the largest, the oldest, the most magnificent of
trees, the noble Sequoia. This alone is sufficient to preserve his
memory forever.




                            BIBLIOGRAPHY[8]


                                GENERAL

+Bigelow, John+—1856. “Descriptions of Remarkable and Valuable
California Trees.” U. S. War Dept. _Pacific Railroad Report_,
1855–1861; Vol. 4, Pt. 2, pp. 22–23.

+Clark, Galen+—1907. _Big Trees of California._ (Reflex Pub. Co.,
Redondo, Cal.), 104 pp.

+Dudley, William R.+ and others—1900. “A Short Account of the Big Trees
of California.” Forest Service, 1887–1913. _Bulletin 28_, pp. 1–30.

+Grant, Madison+—1919. “Saving the Redwoods.” (New York Zoological
Society, New York). _Bulletin_, 1897–1924; Vol. 22, pp. 91–118. 1920.
“Saving the Redwoods.” (National Geographical Society, Washington, D.
C.) _National Geographic Magazine_, 1892–1924; Vol. 37, pp. 519–536.

+Hooker, W. T.+—1854. “Wellingtonia Gigantea.” (Lovell Reeve Co.,
London). _Curtis’ Botanical Magazine_, Third Series, 1845–1904; Vol.
10, Tab. 4777, 4778.

+Hutchings, J. M.+—1886. _In the Heart of the Sierras._ (Pacific Press,
Oakland). pp. 241–247.

+Jepson, W. L.+—1923. _Trees of California._ (Independent Press, San
Francisco). pp. 13–30.

+Lemmon, John G.+—1890. “Cone Bearers of California.” (California State
Board of Forestry, Sacramento). Biennial _Report_, 1886–1921, Vol. 3.,
pp. 157–168. 1898. “Conifers of the Pacific Slope.” (The Sierra Club,
San Francisco.) _Bulletin_, 1893–1924; Vol. 2, pp. 171–2.

+Muir, John+—1894. _The mountains of California._ (Century Co., New
York). pp. 197–200. 1912. _The Yosemite._ (Century Co., New York). pp.
127–147. 1901. _Our National Parks._ (Houghton-Mifflin Co., Boston).
pp. 268–330.

+Murray, Andrew+—1859. “Notes on California Trees.” (Neill and Co.,
Edinburgh). _Edinburgh Philosophical Journal._ New Series, 1855–1864,
Vol. 2, pt. 2, pp. 205–221.

+Shinn, Charles H.+—1889. “The Big Trees.” (Garden and Forest Pub. Co.,
New York). _Garden and Forest_, 1889–1897; Vol. II, pp. 614–615.

+Sudworth, George B.+—1908. _Forest Trees of the Pacific Slope._ U.
S. Forest Service, pp. 138–145. 1900. “Forest Reservations.” U. S.
Geological Survey Annual _Report_, 1880–1913, Vol. 21, pp. 526–532.

+Veitch, James+—1881. _A Manual of Coniferae._ (James Veitch and Sons,
London). pp. 204–212.

+Williamson, R. S.+—1856. “Mammoth Trees of California.” U. S. War
Dept. _Pacific Railroad Report_, 1855–1861; Vol. 5, pp. 257–259.


                      THE AULD LANG SYNE OF TREES

+Gray, Asa+—1872. “The Sequoia and its History.” (Peabody Academy of
Sciences, Salem, Mass.) _American Naturalist_, 1867–1924; Vol. 9, pp.
577–596.

+Hutchinson, H. N.+—1911. _Extinct Monsters and Creatures of Other
Days._ (D. Appleton and Co., New York). Third Edition, pp. 1–50,
124–186, 199–210.

+Jepson, W. L.+—1910. _Silva of California._ (University Press,
Berkeley). pp. 127–128.

+King, Clarence+—1902. _Mountaineering in the Sierra Nevada._ (Chas.
Scribners and Sons, New York). pp. 1–6.

+Lawson, Andrew C.+—1921. “The Sierra Nevada.” (University Press,
Berkeley). _University of California Chronicle_, 1896–1924; Vol. 23,
pp. 130–149.

+Matthes, François F.+—1912. _Sketch of Yosemite National Park and an
Account of the Origin of the Yosemite and Hetch Hetchy Valleys._ U. S.
Dept, of the Interior, pp. 6–8.

+Wells, H. G.+—1921. _The Outline of History._ (Macmillan Co., New
York). Third Edition; 1 Vol., pp. 5–12, 19–36.


                THE GLORY OF THE MOUNTAINS OF CALIFORNIA

+Clark, F. L.+—1901. “The Big Basin.” (Sierra Club, San Francisco).
_Bulletin_, 1893–1924; Vol. 3, pp. 218–223.

+Hall, Ansel F.+—1921. _Guide to Giant Forest._ (Ansel F. Hall,
Yosemite). 127 pp.

+Hastings, Cristel+—1923. “Muir Woods, A National Monument.”
(Pacific-Atlantic Pub. Co., San Francisco). _Scenic America_; Vol. 2,
No. 2, pp. 17–23.

+Hill, C. L.+—1916. _Forests of Yosemite, Sequoia and General Grant
National Parks._ U. S. Dept. of the Interior, pp. 5–13.

+Jepson, W. L.+—1910. _Silva of California._ (University Press,
Berkeley). pp. 9, 128–143.

+Kellogg, A.+—1884. _Redwood and Lumbering in California Forests._
(Edgar Cherry & Co., San Francisco). pp. 76–102.

+Muir, John+—1901. _Our National Parks._ (Houghton-Mifflin Co.,
Boston). pp. 268–330. 1920. “Save the Redwoods.” (Sierra Club, San
Francisco). _Bulletin_, 1893–1923; Vol. II, pp. 1–4.

+Osborn, Henry Fairfield+—1919. “Sequoia—the Auld Lang Syne of Trees.”
(American Museum of Natural History, New York). _Natural History_,
1900–1924; Vol. 19, pp. 598–613.

+Price, William W.+—1892. “Discovery of a New Grove of Sequoia
Gigantea.” (T. S. Brandegee, San Francisco). _Zoe_, 1890–1900; Vol. 3,
pp. 132–133. 1893. “Description of a New Grove of Sequoia Gigantea.”
(Sierra Club, San Francisco). _Bulletin_, 1893–1924; Vol. 1, pp. 17–22.

+Sommers, Fred M.+—1898. “Forests of the California Coast Range.”
(Harper & Bro., New York). _Harpers Magazine_, 1850–1924; Vol. 79, pp.
653–660.

+Sudworth, George B.+—1908. _Forest Trees of the Pacific Slope._ U. S.
Dept. Forest Service, pp. 138–148.

+Walker, Frank L.+—1890. “Sequoia Forests of the Sierra Nevada: Their
Location and Area.” (T. S. Brandegee, San Francisco). _Zoe_, 1890–1900;
Vol. 1, pp. 198–204.


                              GALEN CLARK

+Bunnell, Lafayette H.+—1911. _Discovery of Yosemite and the Indian
War of 1851 Which Led to that Event._ (Gerlicher, Los Angeles). Fourth
Edition, pp. 339–348.

+Clark, Galen+—1904. _Indians of Yosemite Valley._ (H. S. Crocker Co.,
San Francisco). “Introductory Sketch of the Author.” pp. IX-XVIII.

+Foley, J. D.+—1903. _Yosemite Souvenir and Guide._ (J. D. Foley,
Yosemite). pp. 102–103.

+Hutchings, J. M.+—1860. _Scenes of Wonder and Curiosity in
California._ (Hutchings and Rosenfield, San Francisco). pp. 140–142.

+Kuykendall, Ralph S.+—1921. “History of the Yosemite Region.” (G. P.
Putnam’s Sons, New York). _Handbook of Yosemite National Park._ Ed. by
Ansel F. Hall, pp. 19–24, 28–29.

+Lester, John Erastus+—1873. _The Yosemite: Its History._ (Providence
Press, Providence). pp. 17–18.

+Muir, John+—1910. “Galen Clark.” (Sierra Club, San Francisco).
_Bulletin_, 1893–1924; Vol. 7, pp. 215–220. 1912. _The Yosemite._
(Century Co., New York). pp. 240–248.

+Whitney, J. D.+—1870. _Yosemite Guide-Book._ (University Press: Welch,
Bigelow & Co., Cambridge). pp. 1–23.

——. “California Commissioners to Manage Yosemite Valley and the
Mariposa Grove of Big Trees.” (Sacramento). Biennial _Reports_ for
1870, 1873, 1875, 1877, 1886, 1888, 1890, 1892, 1894, 1896, 1898, 1902,
1904.


                              WONDER TREES

+Bancroft, A. L.+—1871. _Bancroft’s Tourist Guide of Yosemite._ (A. L.
Bancroft & Co., San Francisco). pp. 57–71.

+Dudley, William R.+—1913. “Vitality of the Sequoia Gigantea.”
(Stanford University Pub., Palo Alto). _Dudley Memorial Volume_, pp.
40–41. 1900. “Big Trees of California.” (American Forestry Association,
Washington, D. C.) _Forester_, 1899–1924; Vol. 6, pp. 206–210. 1900.
“Lumbering in Sequoia National Park.” _Forester_, Vol. 6, pp. 293–295.

+Hall, William L.+—1911. “Uses of Commercial Woods of the United
States.” U. S. Forest Service, 1887–1913. _Bulletin_ 95, pp. 57–62.

+Hutchings, J. M.+—1860. _Scenes of Wonder and Curiosity in
California._ (Hutchings & Rosenfield, San Francisco), pp. 9–12, 40–50,
140–148. 1886. _In the Heart of the Sierras._ (Pacific Rural Press,
Oakland), pp. 214–232, 256–263.

+Jepson, W. L.+—1921. “The Giant Sequoia.” (G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New
York). _Handbook of Yosemite National Park._ Ed. by Ansel F. Hall, pp.
237–246. 1910. _Silva of California._ (University Press, Berkeley), pp.
145–146.

+Kellogg, A.+—1882. “Forest Trees of California.” (California State
Mining Bureau, Sacramento). Reports, 1880–1921. Vol. 2, Appendix. 1884.
“Essay on Redwood.” (Edgar Cherry Co., San Francisco). _Redwood and
Lumbering in California Forests_, pp. 102–107.

+King, Clarence+—1902. _Mountaineering in the Sierra Nevada._ (Chas.
Scribners & Sons, New York), pp. 49–53.

+Kneeland, Samuel+—1871. _Wonders of Yosemite Valley and of
California._ (Alexander Moore, Boston), pp. 47–51.

+Osborn, Henry Fairfield+—1912. “Preservation of the World’s Animal
Life.” (American Museum of Natural History, New York). _Natural
History_, 1900–1924. Vol. 12, pp. 123–124.

+Pinchot, Gifford+—1899. “A Primer of Forestry.” U. S. Forest Service,
1887–1913. _Bulletin 24_, pt. 1, pp. 44–65.

+Sudworth, George B.+—1912. “Present Conditions of the California
Big Trees.” (American Museum of Natural History, New York). _Natural
History_, 1900–1924; Vol. 12, pp. 227–236.

—— 1917. “Our Big Trees Saved.” (National Geographical Society,
Washington, D. C.) _National Geographic Magazine_, 1892–1924; Vol. 31,
pp. 1–11.

—— 1923. _Rules and Regulations of Yosemite National Park._ U. S. Dept.
of the Interior, p. 13.

OLDEST LIVING THING

+Dudley, William R.+—1913. “Vitality of the Sequoia Gigantea.”
(Stanford University Pub., Palo Alto). _Dudley Memorial Volume_, pp.
33–42.

+Eisen, Gustav+—1893. “Native Habits of the Sequoia Gigantea.” (T. S.
Brandegee, San Francisco). _Zoe_, 1890–1900. Vol. 4, pp. 141–144.

+Gray, Asa+—1844. “The Longevity of Trees.” (Otis Brooders Co.,
Boston). The _North American Review_, 1815–1924; Vol. 59, pp. 189–238.

+Lemmon, John G.+—1890. “Cone-Bearers of California.” (California State
Board of Forestry, Sacramento). Biennial _Report_, 1886–1921; Vol. 3,
pp. 165–166.

+Magee, Thomas+—1895. _Immortality of the Big Trees._ (William Doxey,
San Francisco). pp. 61–77.


                            THE ETERNAL TREE

+Breasted, James H.+—1916. _Ancient Times._ (Ginn & Co., Boston). pp.
157–158.

+Chase, J. Smeaton+—1911. _Yosemite Trails._ (Houghton-Mifflin Co.,
Boston). pp. 126–143.

+Gray, Asa+—1854. “On the Age of a Large Tree Recently Felled in
California.” (G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York). _American Journal of
Science_, Second Series, 1846–1870. Vol. 17, pp. 440–443. Re-printed
1857. (American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Boston). _Proceedings_,
1864–1923; Vol. 3, pp. 94–96.

+Hill, C. L.+—1916. _Forests of Yosemite, Sequoia, and General Grant
National Parks._ U. S. Dept. of the Interior, p. 15.

+Huntington, Ellsworth+—1912. “Secret of the Big Trees.” (Harper &
Bro., New York). _Harper’s Magazine_, 1850–1924; Vol. 125, pp. 92–302.
Re-printed 1913. U. S. Dept. of the Interior. 24 pp.

+Jepson, W. L.+—1910. _Silva of California._ (University Press,
Berkeley). pp. 58, 146. 1921. “The Giant Sequoia.” (G. P. Putnam’s
Sons, New York). _Handbook of Yosemite National Park._ Ed. by Ansel F.
Hall, pp. 240–241.

+Le Conte, Joseph+—1875. _Journal of Ramblings Through the Sierra
Nevada._ (Francis Valentine & Co., San Francisco). pp. 24–26.
Re-printed 1900. (The Sierra Club, San Francisco). _Bulletin_,
1893–1924; Vol. 3, pp. 26–27.


                         A BLOSSOM OF DECADENCE

+Fitch, H. C.+—1900. “The Yosemite Triangle.” U. S. Geological Survey
(Annual _Report_, 1880–1913). Vol. 21, pp. 571–574.

+Gray, Asa+—1872. “The Sequoia and its History.” (Peabody Academy of
Sciences, Salem, Mass.) _American Naturalist_, 1867–1924; Vol. 9, pp.
577–581.

+Jepson, W. L.+—1910. _Silva of California._ (University Press,
Berkeley). p. 144.

+Muir, John+—1877. “On the Post Glacial History of Sequoia Gigantea.”
(American Association for the Advancement of Science, Salem, Mass.)
_Proceedings_, 1848–1915; Vol. 25, pp. 242–252. 1901. _Our National
Parks._ (Houghton-Mifflin Co., Boston). pp. 274–275, 284.

+Sudworth, George B.+—1912. “Present Conditions of the California
Big Trees.” (American Museum of Natural History, New York). _Natural
History_, 1900–1924; Vol. 12, pp. 227–236.


                          A NAME FOR THE AGES

+Bloomer, H. G.+—1868. “On the Scientific Name of the Big Trees.”
(California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco). _Proceedings_,
1854–1896; Vol. 3, p. 399.

+Decaisne, J.+—1854. “Sequoia Gigantea.” (Société Botanique de France,
Paris). _Bulletin_, 1854–1921. Vol. 1, pp. 70–71.

+Endlicher, Stephen+—1847. _Synopsis Coniferarum._ (Sangalli, Scheitlin
and Zollikofer). pp. 198–199.

+Engleman, George+—1880. “Botany of California.” (John Wilson & Son,
Cambridge). California Geological Survey _Report_. Vol. 2, p. 117.

+Gray, Asa+—1854. “Mammoth Trees of California.” (G. P. Putnam’s Sons,
New York). _American Journal of Science_, Second Series, 1846–1870.
Vol. 18, pp. 286–287.

+Gordon, George+—1880. _Pinetum._ (N. G. Bolon, London). pp. 414–416.

+Kellogg+ and +Behr+—1855. “Taxodium Giganteum.” (California Academy of
Science, San Francisco). _Proceedings_, First Series, 1854–1874. Vol.
1, p. 51.

+Jepson, W. L.+—1910. _Silva of California._ (University Press,
Berkeley). pp. 138–139, 128.

+Lindley, John+—1853. “New Plants.” (Bradbury & Evans, London).
_Gardner’s Chronicle_, 1841–1924. Vol. 13, pp. 823, 819–820.

+Lemmon, John G.+—1890. “Cone-Bearers of California.” (California State
Board of Forestry, Sacramento). Biennial _Report_, 1886–1921. Vol. 3,
pp. 158–159, 161–163.

+Sudworth, George B.+—1898. “Check List of the Forest Trees of the
United States.” U. S. Forest Service, 1887–1913. _Bulletin_ 17, pp.
28–29. 1897. “A Nomenclature of Arborescent Flora of the United
States.” U. S. Forest Service, 1887–1913. _Bulletin 14_, pp. 61–62.

+Torrey, John+—1856. “Description of the General Botany of California.”
U. S. War Dept. _Pacific Railroad Report_, 1855–1861. Vol. 4, pt. 5, p.
140.

+Whitney, J. D.+—1870. _Yosemite Guide Book._ (University Press: Welch,
Bigelow & Co., Cambridge). pp. 139–141.

+Winslow, C. F.+—1854. “Letters from the Mountains.” (Warren & Co., San
Francisco). _California Farmer_, 1854–1880. Vol. 2, No. 8, p. 58.


                                SEQUOYAH

+Gallatin, Albert+—1836. “A Synopsis of the Indian Tribes of North
America.” (University Press, Cambridge). American Antiquarian Society.
_Translations and Collections_, 1820–1911. Vol. 2, pp. 92–93 and
Appendix 301.

+Kroeber, A. L.+—1923. _Anthropology._ (Harcourt, Brace & Co., New
York). pp. 223–225, 263–292.

+Magee, Thomas+—1895. _The Alphabet and Language._ (William Doxey, San
Francisco). pp. 1–57.

+McKinney, T. L.+ and +Hall, James+—1838. _History of the Indian Tribes
of North America._ (Frederick W. Greenbough, Philadelphia). Vol. 1, pp.
63–70.

+Mooney, James+—1900. “Myths of the Cherokee.” U. S. Bureau of American
Ethnology, 1899–1924. Nineteenth Annual _Report_. Vol. 1, pp. 14,
135–139, 147–148, 219–220, 351, 353–355, 485, 501.

+Phillips, William A.+—1870. “Se-quo-yah.” (Harper & Brothers, New
York). _Harper’s Magazine_, 1850–1924. Vol. 41, pp. 542–548.

+Pilling, James C.+—1888. “Bibliography of Iroquoian Languages.” U. S.
Bureau of American Ethnology, 1887–1924. _Bulletin 6_, pp. 41–42, 72–73.

+White, George B.+—1855. _Historical Collections of Georgia._ (Pudney &
Russell, New York). pp. 387–389.

+Wells, H. G.+—1921. _The Outline of History._ (Macmillan Co., New
York). Third Edition. Vol. 1, pp. 168–176, 254, 558–560.


                               FOOTNOTES:

[1] The Grant of 1864 was ceded back to the Nation in 1906 and became
    incorporated in Yosemite National Park, which was created sixteen
    years earlier.

[2] This measurement was made in June of 1912 (as were the other
    measurements given on these pages) by David A. Sherfey, resident
    engineer of the Park at this time.

[3] The wood of the Big Tree must not be confused with that of the
    Redwood, for the latter has a very high economic value as a
    commercial wood, and is noted for its many excellent qualities.

[4] Scientifically speaking it is not proper to attribute a will to a
    form of plant life. Its use here is in a non-scientific sense.

[5] Computations made at the ground, thirty-one feet, give over
    three-quarters of a million board feet; while those made eleven
    feet above, where the diameter is but twenty feet, give only a
    quarter of a million feet of lumber. The figure given above is,
    therefore, a fair one. Random statements that this tree contains
    a million board feet of lumber rest on no substantial basis.

[6] The interesting question raised by Sudworth in 1898 whether the
    specific name should be _Gigantea_ or _Washingtonia_ is discussed
    in Bulletin Number 17, U. S. Forest Service, Page 28.

[7] A mythical Phoenician who brought letters to the Greeks and in
    whose honor the people of Thebes erected a magnificent edifice
    known as the Cadmeum.

[8] The author desires to offer grateful acknowledgement for the
    extensive and liberal use he has made of this bibliography in the
    preparation of the manuscript. He is further indebted to Clarence
    King’s _Mountaineering in the Sierra Nevada_; Mark Twain’s
    _Innocents Abroad_, Vol. II; and to the writings of Bret Harte,
    for many suggestions and numerous happy phrases.


                          Transcriber’s Notes:

  • Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).
  • Text enclosed by pluses is in small caps (+small caps+).
  • Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIANT SEQUOIA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dick Chester
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Dick Chester
        A story of the Civil War

Author: G. I. Whitham

Release date: August 2, 2025 [eBook #76615]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Blackie and Son Limited, 1921

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DICK CHESTER ***







[Illustration: Cover art]



[Frontispiece: DICK ANSWERS THE ROUNDHEAD MESSENGER]



  Dick Chester

  A Story of the Civil War


  BY

  G. I. WHITHAM



  _ILLUSTRATED BY PAUL HARDY_



  BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED
  LONDON GLASGOW AND BOMBAY




  CONTENTS

  CHAP.

  I. Dick Swims the Moat
  II. Captain of Dent
  III. The Enemy at Dent
  IV. The Flag goes Down--and Up
  V. Giles makes a Sortie
  VI. Dick and Giles draw Lots
  VII. Giles's Master
  VIII. Dick's Disappearance
  IX. Master Purvis tells a Tale
  X. The Inn-keeper's Boy
  XI. The Lady Dorothy Byng
  XII. Dick's Cousin
  XIII. Lady Dorothy's Story
  XIV. The Coming of John Dent
  XV. Dick Meets Death
  XVI. Her Ladyship's Promise
  XVII. Dick goes for Help
  XVIII. In their Majesties' Lodgings
  XIX. Giles's Master again
  XX. Giles
  XXI. The End of John Dent
  XXII. Dick's Return
  XXIII. Her Ladyship Finishes her Story




ILLUSTRATIONS


Dick answers the Roundhead Messenger ... _Frontis._

"He held up a bright object dangling from a silk string" [missing
from source book]

"May I come in, madam?" he asked [missing from source book]




DICK CHESTER



CHAPTER I

DICK SWIMS THE MOAT

Giles the stableman had led out the horses, the two horses--one for
the steward, Master Purvis, one for Captain Dent,--and he stood at
their heads in the castle-yard.  The owner of the castle, Sir
Reginald Chester, was dead--killed in battle; Captain Dent, his
cousin, did not care to hold Dent Castle for the King, and was
leaving it to its fate.  The servants had fled, hearing the enemy
were at hand.  Master Purvis remained, and Giles the
stableman--Master Purvis because he was too fat to run away, and
Giles by Captain Dent's orders, and for reasons of his own.  Dick
Chester, the late baronet's son, aged eleven years, stood on the
steps, very red in the face, waiting for his cousin.  Out came
Captain Dent, swinging a riding-whip--a handsome, hard-looking man,
dressed in a riding-suit of buff leather, with a breastplate of steel
and a crimson sash.  His beaver hat was of black, with a waving
crimson plume, and a long sword swung at his heels as he strode down
the steps.  Dick sprang forward.

"Cousin--!" he cried.

"Is the flag down?" asked Captain Dent of Giles, who stepped back and
looked up at the tower.

"Yes, sir," he said, saluting.

"Cousin John," Dick said, coming up to him again, "I wish to remain
behind."

"You wish?" said the captain grimly.  "Get on to that horse, and be
brisk, I advise you.  You and your wishes!  Go to!"

Dick hung back with an angry glance at the captain, who turned to the
stableman.

"Go and find that fat fool of a steward.  Am I to wait all day for
servants and children?"

He swore as he sprang into the saddle.

"What, not up yet?" he thundered, as he saw Dick still irresolute on
the steps of the door.

"'Tis my house," the boy cried impulsively; "my house, now my
father's dead.  It was to be held for the King.  You've no right to
drive us away.  You've no business--"

The captain made a long arm and struck at him.  Dick dodged the blow,
flew down the steps, whipped across the courtyard, over the
drawbridge, and out of sight.  Captain Dent spurred after him,
thundered across the bridge, and stared about him.  The long white
road twisted through the fields to the highway.  Through the length
and breadth of the land all was still.  There was not a sign of Dick.
The captain was furious.  He swore.  He stormed.  He searched every
ditch and hedgerow with his eye.  No Dick.  The fat steward came
ambling out behind him.  He suggested that they should call to him.
As if, quoth his kinsman, he would come!  It was rather like singing:
"Dilly-dilly ducks, come and be killed", you know, for John Dent was
a cruel man, and Dick feared him dreadfully.  There was only a
thrashing in store for him did he come.  Master Purvis suggested
searching.

"Not I," said the captain; "he may stay and starve, for me; or be
found by Roundheads and hanged, for me!  Up with the drawbridge,
Giles!  Surrender when called upon, and good-day!"

So the captain pricked his horse up to a canter, and Master Purvis,
with a wry face, for he hated riding, jogged behind him.

No sooner were they well out of sight down the highway than young
Richard Chester appeared on the scene from a little wood behind the
old gray castle.  When he reached the moat he found the drawbridge
was drawn up, but at the same time perceived Giles the stableman's
dark head through the latticed panes of the gate-house window.

"What ho, there!  Giles!" he shouted.

No answer.

"Giles!" again he shouted.

No movement.

Losing patience at the fourth repetition, he took up a pebble and
flung it through the glass into the room.  At this Giles came forth.

"Let down the bridge, sirrah!" cried little Dick.

"Not so, my young friend," answered the stableman.

"I'm not your young friend," said Dick angrily.  "Let down the
bridge!"

"Not so, my young enemy, then," Giles replied calmly.  "I hold this
castle for the King.  Those who run away at twelve cannot return at
one.  Good-morning."

He turned away.

"Giles," Dick shouted, dancing on the moat-edge in his excitement, "I
order you!  I'm your master."

"Ha, ha!" said Giles, "that is a good jest, my little one," and he
stepped back.

"I'm Sir Richard Chester, and the castle's mine!" Dick cried.

"Come and take it then, my man," said Giles, and he went back into
the gate-house, and shut the door.

Prayers, entreaties, threats, explanations passed across the moat to
unheeding ears.  Dick at last, tired out, sat down and cried.  Then,
stung by the thought that Giles the stableman watched and laughed, he
sprang up, pulled off his coat and shoes, plunged into the deep moat,
and swam across.




CHAPTER II

CAPTAIN OF DENT

Little Dick Chester had never known a mother's love nor a father's
care.  His mother died when he was born.  His father had been too
much occupied with the King's business to attend to his family.  Dick
had been alternately petted and tyrannized over by servants.  He was
high-spirited, but had never been taught to control himself, and his
want of training amongst gentle people had left him something of a
savage.  His cousin John had beaten him for his insolence, as he
called it; and the rector of the parish had set him tasks to learn
for his carelessness; but he had never had an example to go by.  He
feared his cousin, and hated learning in the person of the rector.
He was proud--proud of his good birth, of his old castle, of his new
title,--inclined to be overbearing, and, if roughly used, revengeful.

Struggling out of the moat water, he dashed open the gate-house door,
and with a torrent of angry words, dripping, gasping, choking, flung
his small person into the room.

"Upon my word!" said Giles the stableman.  He was sitting at the
table writing.

"What do you mean?  How do you dare?"  Dick cried, tossing the drops
from his hair.  "Writing!  Since when did beggars learn to spell?"
He swept ink, pens, and paper off the table on to the floor.

"Since young gentlemen ceased to learn manners," said Giles, and he
frowned.

"Pooh!" said Dick rudely, stamping on the fallen papers.  "Go to, for
a surly rogue and pretender.  You cannot write your own name nor what
you are--beggar."

"I could write your name and what you are, nathless," said Giles,
picking up his writing from the floor.

Dick clutched at the paper to tear it away.  "Fair and softly," said
Giles, holding it far above his head.  "Go and fetch your coat and
shoes, your honour, and then we'll have a talk."

He let down the bridge.  Dick shook his head.  "When I'm across
you'll pull it up again and leave me."

For answer Giles snapped his fingers, walked out across the bridge,
picked up the coat and shoes, and came back.  The bridge was pulled
up, the portcullis lowered, and Giles came in to find Dick reading
the superscription of the letter which he had taken from the floor.

"'To His Majesty the King!'"  He laughed at Giles.  "You write to the
King, Giles!" and he laughed again.

"Sir," said Giles, "I was never thrashed for reading another man's
letter, but I have the best will in the world to thrash you for it
now.  However, I'd do it did I not know you were ignorant of
politeness, never having been taught it.  Let it pass."

Dick blushed, but said angrily: "You!  Who are you?  The stable-help?"

Giles bowed.

"Picked up by Captain Dent, who knows where, or how, three days ago."

"True," said Giles.  "On the great North Road, sitting in the ditch,
starving.  'Want a job, my man?' said the captain.  'Want some food,
my lord,' said I meekly.  'Hold my horse,' growled the captain, and
went into an inn.  At the end of half an hour he came out of the inn
and asked me one or two questions.  'On what side was I?'  'On the
road-side,' I answered.  'Did I want an easy job and much money?'
'Of course I did.'  Followed a good meal at The Checkers, in the
presence of two ugly Puritans, and then the captain's stirrup and a
long trot hither."

Dick listened with interest, half-forgetting his anger.

"Why did you lie in the ditch starving, Giles?" he demanded.

"Because," said Giles gravely, "had I lain in the middle of the road
I should have been, by your leave, trodden on.  And now, sir," he
added, "let me tell you I am for toe King, and I happen to know it
was the King's will that this house should be held for him."

"Yes," Dick cried, "word was sent us with the express order to keep
the flag flying and hold out till relieved.  Then comes news of my
father's death, and Master Purvis was frightened.  Then comes my
cousin, Captain Dent, saying we must all quit, and he brings--"

"Me," said Giles, "and he bids me shut up the house closely when he
has gone, and surrender to the first Roundhead who knocks at the
gate.  Captain John Dent is a traitor."

Dick started to his feet.

"Giles," he cried, "what shall we do?"

"When I saw you," said Giles, shaking his finger at him, "running
away this morning, I thought you too were a traitor.  I would have
stood by the old place, and--"

"Giles!  I only ran away from my cousin.  I'm here.  I've come back.
I hid so's to return."

"Very good," said Giles.  "Then we two will hang on here, and fly our
old rag over the crop-ears of Puritans."

Dick did not think to question the loyalty and devotion of the
stableman.  His plan was his plan; his intention jumped with his own.
He had only been in the place a week; he was a stranger, a beggar a
tramp from the road, a starving man out of a ditch, but there was
something so gay, so fearless about him that young Dick was attracted.

"For God and the King!" cried Giles, tossing his battered hat.

"For God and the King!" Dick echoed proudly, and they shook hands.

"We're well victualled, sir," said Giles, "and our walls will stand
anything but cannon.  You must know I heard a thing or two at The
Checkers that led me to suppose the enemy may be here any moment."

Dick gave a caper of delight.  Fancy the glory!  A castle to hold
alone--almost alone!  Sir Richard Chester, aged eleven, supported
only by a stable-helper, held his castle for the King for--oh,
weeks!--with incredible risks!  Dick almost regretted the great
stores of flour, of beer, of hams and cured pork, of preserves and
wines at his command.  He was almost ashamed of the thickness of his
walls, for he was in comparative safety, and might dwell at his ease
and laugh at his foes he thought.

"Giles," he said.

"Sir," said Giles, pulling his forelock.

"I am the captain of this castle."

"Not a doubt of it, sir."

Dick smiled, and walked, head in air, across the floor.  Giles
watched him.

"If your honour will go and change your clothes, which are too wet to
be healthy, I will prepare dinner," he said respectfully.

A clammy, clinging feeling about the legs and back moved Dick to
acquiescence.  He ran out, first being graciously pleased to remark
that he was hungry.

Giles followed him thoughtfully across the court and into the
kitchen.  During dinner, which Dick insisted upon Giles sharing with
him, he explained that he had decided that Giles must be promoted
from the stables to be his lieutenant, especially as there were no
horses in the stables to mind.  Giles thanked him with becoming
gratitude.  Then Dick held forth upon the grand position they were
in, the solemnity of their trust, and the wicked desertion of Captain
John Dent.

"He said he had no orders to hold the place," Dick said, "and we
couldn't without him.  His orders were to rejoin his regiment.  He
frightened the men-servants with something or other, and they ran
away.  No one cared but me."

"What did he mean to do with you, I wonder?" said Giles.

"Take me with him and put me to school, he said," and Dick shrugged
his shoulders.  Defending a castle is better than school, and an
enemy not yet arrived is pleasanter in contemplation than a cousin's
harsh words and heavy whip.

"Is the flag up, Giles?" he questioned restlessly.  And, seeing that
it was, he set off to visit the walls and defences, as he said.
Later in the afternoon he came out on the leads by the flagstaff, and
found Giles there looking out over the land.  Giles was a tall young
man, but he stooped somewhat.  His dark hair was not cropped like the
Puritans', nor long and waving like the Cavaliers'.  It fell over his
brow and straggled over his shoulders untidily.  He wore a long beard
and moustache, and his skin was tanned and browned by sun and wind.
He was thin, but seemed stronger and more active than he looked.  His
clothes were an indescribable tangle of rags.  Yet, withal, he looked
clean, and Dick remembered seeing him undergoing very prolonged
morning ablutions at the pump in the yard.  His eyes were
particularly nice, large and rather sad, but very friendly and kind.

Dick sat down by him on the leads.  He was tired, and a little
disappointed that the enemy had not arrived yet and given him an
opportunity for importance.

"Giles," he said, "have you always been a groom?"

"No, sir," said Giles, smiling.

"What have you been?"

"Everything, I fancy, except a thief; and then, again, nothing,
except a fool."

Dick was puzzled.

"What were you doing on the road when Cousin John picked you up?
Where had you been?"

"I had just come from France," said Giles.

Dick stared.

"Well--" he said.

"I was in France, and my master sent for me to come to England."

"I see.  Your master was in England?"

"Ay.  So I took ship and came over.  I was ill at the time, but that
was no matter.  When we landed we stayed the night at an inn--an
infamous place.  The landlord would have murdered me.  The servant
who was with me ran away--custom of servants, you will observe,--the
landlord seized my baggage.  His wife helped me to escape in these
rags of her husband's.  I took, perforce, to the road, for I was
penniless and a stranger, and your cousin found me.  And," he turned
himself round with a comical movement of his hands towards his
tattered person, "behold me!" he said.

Dick laughed.

"And your master, Giles; where is he?"

"Ah, boy! where is every man's master in these days?  He is riding up
and down England, fighting and flying."

"A soldier?" Dick asked.

"Be sure of it," Giles answered.  "We shall meet soon, doubtless."
Then he laughed.  "Faith, he wouldn't know me if we met to-day," he
said.

"Have you been in other countries besides France?" Dick questioned.

"Ay.  Germany, the Low Countries, and Spain, and Russia, and Italy."

"With your master?"

"I have served many masters," said Giles shortly.

Silence fell.  Then Dick suddenly sprang up.

"Look!" he cried, "look!"  He pointed to a cloud of dust on the
highroad.  "They come!" he said.




CHAPTER III

THE ENEMY AT DENT

The cloud of dust rolled nearer.  Presently a dark mass could be seen
on the level road.  Then, before Dick's wondering eyes, a body of
cavalry unrolled itself over the plain in the mellow light of the
September evening.  He caught the heavy tramp, tramp of the horses,
the jingle of bridle-chains, the ring of steel on steel.  Nearer they
came and nearer, blue-gray lines of armed men, with the flutter of an
orange scarf here and there, with here a tossing crest and there a
white charger to relieve the sombre hues of the Puritan horse.  Giles
swept his gray eyes over the moving lines.

"Grand!" he muttered.  "My faith! what won't drilling do?"

Dick moved restlessly at his side.

"Giles, Giles, what next?" he cried, as the word of command rang out
crisply, and the long lines of horsemen swayed and stopped as if
turned to stone.  Then three or four officers rode to the front and
paused, looking at the old walls of Dent, and pointing to the flag
that flapped idly over Dick's young head.

"Their worships are puzzled," said Giles, watching keenly, but
appearing quite calm.  "You see, they thought they were coming to
their own house, so to speak."

Dick laughed a little excited laugh.

"They thought wrong," he bubbled.

Giles looked round at him with his friendly eyes.

"They will come and ask our meaning in a moment, Captain," he said.

"They shall hear," said Dick.

Sure enough, an officer with a white flag came galloping towards the
castle.

"Come along," said Giles.  "I mean, your honour had better speak from
the gate-house."

They crossed the courtyard, and went up the spiral staircase that led
to the gate-house.  The messenger with the white flag had just
arrived opposite, and was reining in his horse.  Giles lifted his old
hat with a bow, and Dick, being nervous, copied the action.

"In whose hands is this castle?" asked the Puritan.

"In mine," Dick shouted back, feeling his own voice very weak and
small after the thundering bass of the soldier.

"You!" said the latter, shielding his eyes from the sun with a
gauntleted hand.  "What are you, prithee?"

"Sir Richard Chester," said Dick proudly.

He looked a gallant little figure as he stood up, straight as a
ramrod, his dark curls blown out like a streamer behind him, and his
hand on the hilt of his dagger.  As Captain of Dent he had thought it
expedient to don his best suit of black velvet, with the lace collar
and cuffs, when he had thrown off his wet clothes before dinner.  His
shoes had steel buckles, and his hat a black plume.  He was in
mourning for his father, and the only colour about him was the
red-leather sheath of his dagger.

The Puritan looked up at him grimly.

"Who is in command here?" he asked.

"I am."

The Puritan laughed.

"Come you down, my manikin," he jeered, "and open the door."

Dick flushed with anger, and was about to fling a retort at the
officer, when Giles spoke to him.

"It's about time, your honour, that His Majesty's name came into the
conversation.  Suppose you say this place is held for him?"

"Dent is held for the King," Dick shouted, and Giles lifted his hat
again.

"What is that?" asked the Puritan, pointing to the tattered figure at
Dick's elbow.  "A scarer of crows?"

"And of bigger things than crows," Giles said smiling.

Dick could not help noticing that though Giles did not seem to lift
his voice, it rang out in the stillness, every word clear and
vibrating.  By the Puritan's his own voice had seemed a mere shrill
squeal, but by Giles's the Puritan's was a roar, hoarse and unmusical.

"Well, you'll have to come out of that," he said.  "The general will
come up and talk to you in person."

"A thousand thanks," Giles said, and it seemed to Dick, who was
struggling in a chaos of half-formed threats, that the stableman
dropped the words over the battlements right into the Puritan's face,
for he started and looked up sharply.  Then he shook his head and
galloped off.

"If we'd a musket I'd put a bullet in him as he rides off," said Dick
savagely.

Giles turned on him with such a blaze of anger in his eyes that Dick
fell back a step or two.

"Fire on a flag of truce!  Fire at a man's back!" Giles said.  "Upon
my soul, Richard Chester, you want shooting yourself!"  He laid a
heavy hand on Dick's collar, and lifted the other.  "You hold a
castle for His Majesty!  You little dastardly puppy!"

He swung Dick round, shook him till his teeth chattered, and let him
drop.  Dick was choking with anger.  He struck at Giles blindly and
silently.  Giles moved away.

"A pretty sight for our friend the enemy," he said quietly; "the
captain cuffing the scarecrow, and the scarecrow shaking the captain.
Get up sir!  Here comes their general to reason with you."

But Dick, white with passion, struggled to his feet only to rush down
the stairs, saying:

"You can answer him yourself, you beast! you beast!  I'll never speak
to you again.  I'll never come near you again."

The door crashed behind him, and Giles, in his rags, with a clouded
face, was left to speak to the enemy alone.

"Now, my man," began the general in a blustering tone, "this is some
little jest, I perceive.  Believe me, 'tis ill fooling with me unless
you are prepared for consequences."

"'Who sups with the devil should have a long spoon'," said Giles.
"I'm prepared.  See the walls.  We are here.  If you want to punish
us, you must get at us.  To get at us you must scale our walls.  If
you try that we shall shoot you.  Pray, begin."

"I was told," said the Puritan imperturbably, and sawing the air with
his forefinger, "that this house would be delivered up to me to-night
by one Giles, a stableman in rags.  You're in rags.  Don't deny it,
sirrah!  I can see them from here."

One of the officers laughed behind his gauntlet, for the wind flapped
Giles's garments mockingly.

"John Dent told you that in the Checkers Inn at Lumley.  I heard
him," said Giles.

"Don't stand prating there, fool!  Come down and let us in," shouted
a choleric little man riding beside the general.

"My orders are to keep you out," said Giles.

"Whose orders?" shrilled the little man.

"Whose orders?" echoed the general.

"Richard Chester's, the Captain of Dent."

Dick, crouching behind the door below, heard and wondered.  Giles
might have left him out of it all when he had made him so furious,
and struck at him so hard.

Arguments, and explanations, and suggestions passed below amongst the
officers.  Commands to surrender, mixed with threats of hanging,
ultimately, were wafted on the evening breeze to Giles.  He replied
with a gentle shake of the head, as if too tired to make speeches,
until the general came to the end of a perfect storm of abuse and
maledictions and insults.  Then Dick heard Giles make answer.

"Your manners are not nice, sir, and your words are not pleasant.
You are angry; to be sure you are.  But, consider, anger in such hot
weather, in a man with your neckband, may lead to an apoplexy.  Let
me recommend a cold supper, with light potations.  Good-night."

Dick fled down the stairs, because he was laughing, and felt that
Giles ought not to see that.  He avoided his lieutenant in gloomy
silence.  He saw him go down to prepare supper, and he lurked in the
hall in the gathering twilight.  Giles went to the yard-door and
looked out; he came to the hall-door and looked in.

"Supper's ready, your honour," he said drily.

Dick took no notice.  Half an hour passed, and he sat in the dark,
holding out dismally against the hunger that begged him to eat.

Giles ran up the turret-stairs whistling a tune.  Then Dick slowly
moved to the kitchen, saw bread and cold meat on the table, and flung
himself upon it.  Crossing the hall in the dark, wondering whether to
go to bed or not, he hesitated, listening.  Overhead he heard the
steady tramp of his lieutenant's feet on the leads.

"He watches"--Dick thought,--"I won't go near him," and went to his
room.  He lay down to sleep in his clothes, but woke very soon and
sat up.  He must get up and see what the enemy were doing.  In his
stocking-feet he ran to the foot of the turret-stairs and listened.
All was still overhead.

"He's asleep," Dick thought, and crept up the steps softly.  The door
at the top was open, and close to it, on the leads, with his head on
his arm, lay Giles.  As Dick's head appeared in the opening, Giles
turned over and fixed him with his eyes.

"I--I--" Dick stammered clumsily.

Giles rose to his feet and saluted.

"Your honour wishes to look out?" he said, and moved aside.

Dick brushed past him and looked over the battlements.  He could see
watch-fires blazing in the fields, and, in the half-lights, descried
white tents--shadowy, vague, like phantom tents.  In the night
silence he could hear the sentries pacing up and down, up and down.
A horse stamped, restless at its feed.  A distant voice started a
dreary psalm-tune, and other voices answered out of the shadows.
Dick gazed and gazed, and behind him Giles stood, at ease but very
silent; and Dick knew that he was looking at him, looking through
him, with the gray eyes he had all but once found so friendly and so
gay.  At last Dick turned from the battlements, and, after several
false attempts, succeeded in passing the tall figure of his officer
with his head reasonably high.  Giles saluted, and Dick passed, with
the knowledge that Giles, in his fluttering rags, was immeasurably
his superior, that he had fallen in the estimation of his stableman,
and was regarded with serene contempt by a beggar off the king's
highway.  When he woke in the morning he was first thrilled with
excitement at the call of a bugle outside, and then recalled the
uncomfortable incident of yesterday, which had dashed the glory of
Richard Chester, Baronet and Captain of Dent.

"Never again," he said aloud, before rising, "never again will I even
think of hitting a man in the back."

"And, therefore," said a voice in the doorway behind him, "you will
never say it any more than, I think, you would ever have done it."

Dick sprang off the bed, and Giles--Giles with the old gray
eyes--saluted with respect from the doorway.

"I dare say I ought to have been shaken," Dick began simply, thinking
aloud in a moment of excitement, "but--

"But," Giles cut in, "you scarcely think I--Ragged Robin--am the man
who should have done it.  My dear sir, consider"--Giles set down a
pail of water he was bringing for Dick to wash in, and spoke
earnestly.--"That kind of thing said amongst men--such men as your
father and my master,--what would it bring you?  Contempt and
dislike.  Believe me, those two things don't make pleasant living.
But, observe now, you spoke without thinking, and because you knew no
better.  Has anyone taught you what a man's honour is?"

"No, Giles," said Dick slowly, "but I think I know--a little."

"Very good," said Giles.  "You are here, and you have taken the
King's honour to keep as well as your own.  His Majesty has no use
for persons who hit in the back.  You understand?  It's just one of
the things we don't do--that such men as my master don't do."

"There are others?" Dick questioned.

"Many others.  But you've learnt one; and be thankful you've learnt
it with me, and not amongst strangers."  And then he added gravely:
"I was very violent; I was very much aggrieved at you.  I must ask
your honour to pardon my assault."

Dick looked at the floor.

"Of course," said Giles, "striking my superior officer in the face of
the enemy proves me mutineer and insubordinate."

Still Dick regarded the floor.

"And, moreover," said Giles, "your honour is perfectly free to think,
and say, and indeed act, now and always, as you please.  What concern
can it be of Giles the stableman?"

Dick had nothing to add.

"If you disgraced yourself before others, ought it to matter to
Giles, or ought he to care?"

Dick's face puckered curiously.  Giles backed hurriedly to the door.

"And thirdly and lastly, your honour's breakfast is waiting."

Dick plunged after him and caught him by the ends of his fluttering
rags.

"Giles--I say--Giles--I am sorry I struck you," he cried huskily.

And Giles turned with a laugh.

"You're a gentleman, Dick!"

The day passed chiefly in sitting on the leads talking.  Dick's eyes
scarcely left the spread-out wonder of the little cavalry camp below.
Questions simply flowed from his lips, to every one of which Giles
seemed to know the answer.  He knew what everything
meant--bugle-calls, horse-exercising, the mysteries of drill, the
saddling-up, the watering, and the thousand-and-one orderly,
fascinating, jingling details of a soldier's day in camp.  He told,
too, stories of other camps that he had seen, of brilliant leaders,
like Prince Rupert, who "never comes but to conquer or to fall".  He
led the boy through the mazes of engagements by day and by night.  He
made him enjoy sieges, both inside the walls and out.  He told him of
deeds of valour that set his blood dancing, and deeds of shame that
made him pause and think.  In moonlight escapes and midnight
massacres, in the silence of prisons and the noises of battlefields,
in perils by land and perils by water Giles the stable-helper had had
his part under the masters he had served.  Dick listened to tales of
strange lands and distant cities, of foreign ways and clothes and
customs.  Giles was indeed a perfect storehouse of romance and
adventure.  And his heroes were all brave and gallant, modest and of
a becoming reverence.  He had no condemnation deep enough for the man
who was false to his God, his King, or his friends.  Dick was
enthralled, enraptured.  To be like these men whom Giles had served
and known, to think such thoughts as theirs, to say such words as
theirs, to live such a life as theirs, and die such a death--this
idea filled his soul.

"Giles," he said, "I will be a hero, the friend of kings, faithful to
death."

"God knows," said Giles; "we are in His hand.  To-morrow a bullet may
kill you, covered with glory; or a week hence you may die in a ditch,
out of sight, never missed.  You may be called to rot all your years
in a dungeon, or die disgraced on a gallows, for that.  You cannot
tell."

"Why, then," said little Dick, "what is the value of striving and
trying?"

"Because," said Giles, "that is what we were born for."

"But these masters you served?" Dick cried.

"Their duty led them to glory," said Giles.  "Had it led to shame,
they'd have followed.  My dear fellow, it's the duty that counts."




CHAPTER IV

THE FLAG GOES DOWN--AND UP

On the sixth day of the siege Dick noticed that his lieutenant looked
unwontedly serious.

"What is it, Giles?" he asked.  "Anything wrong?"

Giles shrugged his shoulders.

"Little Captain," he said, "why don't our friends, the enemy, go away
or attack us?"

"Go away?" Dick asked, for it had not struck him that cavalry might
be better employed than in camping before a castle into which they
could not seemingly get.

"I admit," Giles went on in his jesting way, "that the situation is
salubrious, that the plain is well watered, and that the pasture for
cattle is excellent.  The view, too, of yonder hills is delightful,
for men who have seen neither the Alps nor the Pyrenees.  Your
honour's cows, too, give excellent milk.  Hark to the clatter of the
pails in the hands of the Puritan dairymen!  But, notwithstanding, to
an unprejudiced, leisurely observer, it seems, in these tumults, our
friends there might seek something more suiting their
profession--unless, to be sure," he added, "the troopers are
recruiting their health."

Dick drummed on the stones with his shoe-heels.

"I wish they'd attack us," he said.

"I want--" said Giles.  "I know what I want, little Captain--"

"What do you want?" asked Dick.

"A man--one of those men," said Giles, stretching his hands towards
the camp as if he would have picked up one of the Puritan soldiers
that they could see in the meadow below.  "Now, if I want a bird for
the pot, I go out and shoot him."

Dick caught his hand.

"Let's go out and shoot a MAN!" he cried.

"We can't," Giles said with a despairing gesture.  "How can we?  Why,
your little body wouldn't hold the bullets they'd send us."

Dick sighed.

"Bear up," said Giles, patting his captain's shoulder.  "I'll load a
musket there is in the hall, and go sit me in the room over the gate.
Who knows, some carping pig of a Puritan may come past to bid us
good-day."

He ran down the turret-stairs humming a tune, and Dick watched him
presently cross the courtyard.  There were two windows in the little
room over the portcullis arch in the gate-house--one narrow slit,
with an iron bar down the middle, looked over the moat, and one
looked over the yard, and had a view of the leads and the flagstaff.
Giles had sung two Cavalier songs to himself, and had, I think,
almost forgotten why he was sitting there with a gun across his
knees, when he became aware of a man crouching behind a low wall that
flanked the castle orchard on the far side of the moat, well within
range.

He had scarcely marked him before he heard a report, then a loud cry
from the leads.  Darting to the other window, he saw the flag
drooping from the broken rope.  The wind caught it, held it straight
out for a moment, then down it came at a run, and sank out of sight
behind the battlements.  From down the meadow he heard a cheer.

"For which we will have payment," he said grimly.  He sprang up the
steps to the roof.  The Puritan trooper had stepped out of cover, and
stood mocking, waving his hand to the bare pole.

"He laughs best who laughs last," shouted Giles, with his gun at his
shoulder.  He fired, and the man fell as he laughed.  Giles turned in
time to see the flag fluttering up to the staff-head gaily.  Dick had
knotted the rope, and, looking across at a group of Puritans who were
watching, he waved his hat to them, bowed--in careful imitation of
the stableman's manner--and stepped out of sight.

"Of the right stuff," was Giles's comment, and he went down to meet
his commander.  "Of course," he thought, "he will absolutely require
to tell me how he did it."

When Dick joined him, all he said was:

"Giles, what think you?  They shot at our flag!"

"Very insolent, on my word!" Giles responded, and waited.

"But it's up still," said Dick, and he slipped his hand through
Giles's arm, and smiled to himself.

"I saw," said Giles quietly.  "It was well done.  You're a captain
for a man to serve under, Dick."

For a minute Dick was silent.  Then he looked up.

"I've been thinking, Giles," he said, "that it is very foolish of me
to lord it over you here.  You've served in the wars, Giles, and you
know so much more than I.  It seems a great piece of absurdity.  So
here, I resign.  And--let me see.  Yes.  Have this."  He unbuckled
his dagger.  "It's all I've got, Giles.  Let me fasten it on for you.
What's the matter?  Did I prick you with the point?"

Giles's eyes were suddenly lowered--almost shut, in fact--but Dick
was sure he had seen something very curious about them.  And it
seemed impossible to find Giles's middle amongst his rags, for his
hands were in Giles's hands; and--anyhow, between them, the dagger
fell to the ground.

"Dick, I'd serve under you to the end of time!" Giles said gaily.  "I
wouldn't have you resign for an empire!  Nay, don't talk of
resigning.  Zounds! my dear little fellow, I'm more proud of serving
under you than under any one of my kings and dukes and great barons!"

Dick was convinced of the utter impossibility of giving up his post.
Giles promised to help, to advise, to suggest; but command, no!

"But I'll keep your dagger for a keepsake, sir."

"Call me Dick," the boy cried affectionately.

"I'll keep it in memory of this day, Dick, then, and some day,
perhaps, I'll give you something in exchange."

And there never was a more devoted, attached, considerate, unselfish
couple of officers anywhere in the world.  And if, forgetting his
mightiness, the captain at times waited on the lieutenant, and the
lieutenant at times rated the captain, and if they both laughed
loudly at each other's jests, and played each other desperate
practical jokes, there was no one to complain.  They were prepared to
stand by each other, living, in the face of every foe; and Dick, for
one, had no higher ambition than to die in the esteem and affection
of his lieutenant and stableman Giles.




CHAPTER V

GILES MAKES A SORTIE

"Giles," said Dick in the evening, as they stood on the leads by the
flagstaff; "Giles, they haven't taken the Puritan's body away," and
he pointed to the man where he lay by the moat.

"No," answered Giles.  "I fancy, my Captain, that his people will
leave him alone."

"Do you think--" Dick said, staring at the Puritan's body, "are you
sure he is dead, Giles?"

"That I am quite sure he is not, Dick," said Giles.

Dick nodded.

"I thought I saw him stir."

"He may be dying, and he may be suffering acutely, and he may,
peradventure, need a drink," Giles remarked.

Dick regarded the figure of the soldier a while longer thoughtfully.

"He's an enemy, Giles."

"He was, Dick, so long as he had the will and the strength.  For
myself, I feel no particular anger against yon helpless man now.  But
it may be a lure."

"A lure?" Dick questioned.

"Ay.  They may leave him there to lure us out.  For you must know,
Dick, and they will know, Dick, of what value that man is to us."

"How?"

"He will, maybe, tell us the news.  And news to a besieged castle is
worth risking a life for.  But, you see, in this castle--to our
future glory and present inconvenience--there are so very few lives
to be risked."

"I'll go," said Dick, drawing himself up.

"My child, could you carry him in?"

Dick's face fell.

"I'd drag him hither by the heels."

"I think, were I wounded, I should scarcely like that kind of
carriage," said Giles with a grimace.

"You go, then," said Dick.

Giles saluted.

"At your honour's orders," said he.  "And if you'll do as I tell
you," he added, when Dick expostulated with him for addressing him
so, "I'll let down the bridge and go out, Dick, and you must stand by
to work it up again at need."

He looked down at Dick very earnestly.

"What you have to do, Dick, is the simplest thing in the world.  If
you see me fall, if you see the enemy close with me--more than, say,
three at a time.--up with the bridge!"

"And leave you!" Dick gasped.

"Of course.  It isn't me you're responsible for; it's Dent Castle.
If I go out to bring in my man, there must be no danger to Dent.
Understood, Dick?"

"Yes."

"And you'll do it?"

"Yes."

They shook hands, and going down to the court Giles lifted the
portcullis, and stood in the arch, looking out.  There was nothing to
be seen but the body of the Puritan by the low wall, and nothing at
all to be heard.  Giles shaded his eyes with his hand, and searched
the first meadow.  Not a soul.  Then he examined the camp in the
meadow beyond.

"I can get to my man and back before anyone there could get hither,"
he said.

What he could not see was the little wood in the rear of the castle,
and four troopers and an officer lurking in the orchard.  He let down
the bridge.

"Now, Dick, stand here.  And remember, if I fall, or am attacked, up
with it!"

Dick went and laid his small hand on the crank.  Giles walked over
the bridge, along the side of the moat to the wall of the orchard.
He knelt down by the man's side, and felt for the heart, found it
beat still, though feebly, and rose to his feet.  As he did so he was
almost blinded by the flash of a musket, and the ball carried away
his old battered hat.  Dick, at his post, turned very white, and knew
suddenly, as he saw him face to face with death, how much he had come
to love ragged Giles.

The trooper who had fired dropped his musket, drew his sword, came
running through the orchard shouting, caught his foot in the twisted
root of a plum-tree, and fell sprawling; and his sword, flying up out
of his hand, whizzed almost to Giles's feet.  He picked it up, put it
between his teeth, picked up his man, flung him on his back, and set
off at a run for the bridge.  Two bullets flew past him, and one
lodged in his burden, as he knew by the sound and a sudden twist of
the hands he held in his own.  Three men appeared by the wall.  Two
fired again, and the third, sword in hand, leapt the low wall after
Giles.  Dick, watching, saw Giles start forward and stumble.

"He's hit!" Dick thought, and his hands, clinging to the cranks of
the drawbridge, trembled, and his legs shook under him.

And now he saw a party of horsemen separate from the camp below, and
come galloping over the fields.  But Giles was still running forward.
Oh, how short a way it had seemed to the orchard-wall a moment ago,
and what miles and miles it now seemed to come back!

"He's not down!  They've not closed with him!" Dick told himself.  "I
needn't draw it up yet."

Giles's feet were on the bridge-end as the line of horsemen came into
range, drew up, and fired Dick saw the flash, then the blue line of
smoke.  He heard the report echo and re-echo, and the bullets come
hopping on to the bridge, into the water, and one or two whistled
softly past him and dropped ping-ping on the stones of the court.
Dick shut his eyes.

"Up with it!" a voice shouted in his ear, and something shot past him
and fell at his side.

Flinging all the strength of his little body into the effort, Dick
felt the cranks yield.  Up went the bridge, and the foremost Puritan,
springing and missing his foothold, went down into the water with a
curse and a crash.  A horseman, whipping and spurring for the bridge,
but failing to wrench his charger's head round, followed him with a
splash that sent the moat-water as high as the roof of the
gate-house, and a noise that deafened Dick as he stood tugging at the
portcullis pulleys for dear life.  Giles limped to his aid, and
whilst bullets rained past them, and muskets cracked, and soldiers
shouted, and officers yelled orders, the great iron grating came down
with a clash, and the two besieged comrades lifted a cheer.

"God save the King!" Giles shouted in mocking triumph, and then Dick
leapt into his arms.

"Giles, Giles, I love you!  But oh, Giles, I'm very sick!"

And the two heroes retired to the hall with their Puritan, to ransack
their wounds, as Giles said, and to drink the King's health and the
Captain of Dent's.




CHAPTER VI

DICK AND GILES DRAW LOTS

Giles bound up the Puritan's wounds first, and gave him some wine,
laying him on a settle by the kitchen fire.  He revived a little, but
Giles saw very soon that he was dying.  Dick had conceived the idea
that Giles would torture the trooper to gain information.  Master
Purvis had told him how they treated Guy Fawkes, and what a part the
boot and the thumb-screw had played in similar cases.  But Giles, on
being questioned, said his taste did not run to displays of that
kind, and Dick felt relieved, he scarcely knew why.

Giles was wounded in the leg, but only slightly, the ball having
passed through the flesh without injuring the bone.  He bound it up,
and then they drank to the King.  The Puritan's face twisted in a
grim smile.

"I'm dying," he said slowly.  "To-day me, to-morrow thee."

"Scarcely so soon, I trust," Giles said, fixing a keen eye on the
speaker.

"Within the week," the man said.

Giles gave him more wine.

"We are courageous," he said, smiling, "for your people can't get
into Dent.  In a day, or two days, there will come our own fellows.
Up will be crumpled your psalm-singing friends yonder.  Within a week
we shall have the King here at Dent."

The Puritan, strengthened by the wine, tried to lift himself to his
feet, but fell back again.  He had only power to shake his fist at
Giles.

"Your King," he said, "is six miles off, at Lumley.  Can he hear when
you call him?  He'll hear the guns that shall shatter these doomed
walls, I tell you."

He stopped.  Again Giles gave him wine, but he refused it.

"Your people have no guns to shatter our walls with," Giles said
sternly, bending over him, and, it seemed to Dick, anxiously waiting
for something the trooper might add.

"Within a week," said the man almost inaudibly.  "To-day me,
to-morrow thee."

Giles paused a moment, and then asked Dick to go up on the leads and
see what the enemy were doing.

"Don't come back.  I'll be with you in a few moments," he said.

At the end of a quarter of an hour he came up to him, and told him
that the Puritan soldier was dead.

"We must bury him in the court, Dick, where there are no flags, and
the grass grows."

So they went down and dug him a grave.  Giles bore out the Puritan
wrapped in a cloak, laid him in the ground, and they shovelled in the
earth over him silently.  Then Giles asked for a prayer-book, which
Dick, wondering, found him; and Giles, standing at the foot of the
new grave, bareheaded, in his fluttering rags, read the prayers from
the burial service.

"Perhaps he would have preferred one of his own people to do it, but
I've done my best, Dick," said he at the end; "and I dare say he did
his."

When they were sitting on the leads in the late evening-light, Dick
observed that Giles was silent, preoccupied, absent, not at all
himself.

"Giles," he said, and his companion started.

"I'm thinking, Dickie," he said.  "Will you favour me with your views
on the state of the case at this juncture?"

Giles turned over and lay full-length on the leads, his chin in his
hands, and his eyes fixed on the boy.

Dick did not reply to the question, not quite understanding it, but
he said: "Methinks, Giles, that we took a great deal of trouble this
morning for naught."

"'Naught' being our friend under the earth there," Giles suggested,
waving his hand towards the court.

"He was no good to us," Dick said.

"Was he not?" Giles said, smiling.  "Within a week, he said, we
should be dead.  He called our walls doomed.  He prophesied that His
Majesty would hear the guns that shattered Dent.  He was good enough
to inform us, if you will bend your mind to consider his words,
Captain,--he was good enough to inform us that his people had sent
for artillery; and he was good enough to add, also, that His Majesty
was six miles off, at Lumley.  Why, Dick, if we'd learnt all that
from a letter, how grateful we'd have been to the man who brought it
to us.  Prithee, don't scorn it because I acted as bearer."

Dick looked at Giles solemnly.  "What a wonderful man you are,
Giles!" he said simply.

"Thanks," said Giles, bowing his head.  "The thing is, how shall we
act in the matter?  We want to know if Dent is worth holding--if His
Majesty wants it.  How shall we learn?"

Dick shook his head blankly.  "We cannot," he said.

"Oh, tush, my dear fellow!" said Giles scornfully.  "Let us think."

And he thought, with his eyes fixed on the moon rising over Dick's
head.  Dick thought too, and was the first to come to a solution of
the riddle.

"Giles, you were writing a letter to the King--once--in the
gate-house--you remember.  Someone must carry it to the King quickly."

"First fix on the someone," advised Giles.

"There's only me and you," Dick said breathlessly.

"We'll draw lots," Giles said; "for the reasons for each of us to go
and stay are just equal.  You are the Captain of Dent, and should
stay by the castle.  You are the least observable of us, and
therefore should go.  I might do it swifter, so should go; but there
are other reasons why I should stay."

He did not state the reasons, the chief of which was that, if help
did not come before the Puritan artillery, the one remaining in Dent
would be taken and shot.  Dick's youth might have been his safeguard;
but still, Giles would rather he were safe out of the way.

A little tuft of grass was growing in a cranny of the stone coping,
and Giles plucked two blades.

"These two blades are us, Dick," he said; "the little one's you, and
the big one's me."

He turned and placed them between his finger and thumb, concealing
the ends.

"Now, draw," he said, holding his hand out to Dick.

Dick suddenly felt a wild thrill of excitement, and a tightening of
the throat as if he would choke.  On the one side he saw himself
alone in the great world without the walls, seeking his sovereign,
every tree and hedge hiding an enemy.  On the other, he saw himself
alone in the great empty castle of Dent, fearing at every sunrise the
sight of advancing artillery, and dreading to hear the thunder of
guns in the darkness of every night.

"Draw, draw," said Giles, smiling down at him.  "Now!"

Dick drew one of the narrow green blades, biting his lip hard as he
did so.

Giles opened his hand and looked at the one he still held.  "The long
one stays," he said.  "Dick, it is you."

They had risen for this solemn business, but now they sat down side
by side.  Giles was relieved, and Dick felt, now that the choice was
made for him, that he would have been disappointed had it turned out
otherwise.

"No time to lose," said Giles cheerily.

And Dick said excitedly: "Tell me what I shall do.  Shall I go
to-night?  Giles, they'll see us let down the bridge.  If they take
me, what must I do with the letter?"

"We'll have no letter, Dick," said Giles, stemming the questions.
"'Tisn't safe; 'tisn't needed.  Now, hearken!"

Giles explained what the messenger must do.  He must go out that
night, but not till late, for the moon shone on the wrong side for
them yet.  When the back of Dent was in shadow, Dick must climb out
by the little window in the buttery--Giles would take out the bars.
Dick must then swim the moat, as Giles knew he was quite equal to
doing in moments of excitement.  (Dick laughed guiltily at that.)  He
must then put on a dry suit, for fear the damp and the night air
together crippled him with an ague before he reached Lumley.  Before
he swam across the moat he was to hurl a bundle of clothes to the
other side ready.

"Do you know the way to Lumley?" Giles asked.

"By the fields," said Dick.  "Once I went thither with Master Purvis
to a coursing-match."

"How long will it take you to get there?"

"About two hours.  'Tis a shorter way by the fields, but the first
bit's uphill."

"Well, avoid roads and people.  If a Puritan accosts you, you're a
poor boy driven from home by the enemy.  So you are.  Your father's
killed, and your mother's dead; you have no brothers.  You haven't,
have you?"

"No," said Dick.  "I'd a step-brother, but he died years ago in
France."

"Oh, well, you needn't drag him into a talk with a Puritan!  If you
meet any of our people you're Richard Chester of Dent, with news for
His Majesty or any general commanding at Lumley.  And, mind this,
Dick, don't tell anything else to anyone till you've seen the chief.
Don't be led into the tale of our siege, because no one will believe
you.  Be sure of that."

"Will the King or the general believe me?" Dick asked.

"The Puritan said the King was at Lumley," said Giles.  Then, as if
suddenly struck with some brilliant idea: "My master will be at
Lumley if the King's there!"  Giles seemed to be hunting for
something hidden in his tatters, and presently produced the half of a
golden coin, with a hole in it, attached to a silken cord.  "See; if
you think they are not believing your story, hold up this boldly, and
say: 'Does anyone here know this?'  The one who has the other half is
my master, and if he believes you all will go well."

"Couldn't I ask for him first, Giles?" said Dick.  "What is his name?"

"No," said Giles.  "If you're stopped by a sentry, say your name, and
ask for the general or His Majesty.  If you can get on alone, do, and
reap the glory, Captain.  But if our friends doubt the tale, as they
may--boys and stablemen not holding castles alone as a common thing,
and Captain Dent having, no doubt, told them something very far from
the truth,--up with your token, and see what it brings you."

Dick promised to obey these directions.  It was further arranged that
he should wear an old suit of homespun, and a hat without a plume,
and a collar without lace, and strong shoes without buckles.  As they
put these clothes together in a bundle, Dick said:

"Giles, I've been thinking.  There are clothes in the house--some of
my father's,--could you not put some on?  The winds get cold, Giles
dear.  You'll be chilled."

Giles smiled with more kindness than usual, as he thanked the boy
gently.  "But I have decided," he said, "to go through with this
adventure as I am."  He surveyed his figure in a mirror.  "Upon my
soul, Dick, the flutter of my clothes when a draught fans them is
decidedly quaint.  It's like living with congenial companions; they
sympathize with every mood, my dear.  If I sigh, they sigh with me;
if I laugh, the merry wags shake all over like aspens; if I am in a
hurry, they spread out like wings to assist me.  Never was man more
at one with his garments, or his clothes more a part of himself."

"But, Giles, if your master comes with me, what will he think of you?"

Giles laughed softly.  "Faith, Dick, it will greatly amuse him.  And
after, why it will make a rare jest for--for the other servants of my
master."

When the moon was silvering the old gray gate-house and the flags of
the courtyard of Dent, Dick was standing in the dark, with nothing
on, on the brink of the moat at the back.  He flung his bundle over,
and heard it fall with a thud on the far bank.  Then he ran back,
shivering, and embraced Giles through the buttery window.  There was
nothing more to say of advice or caution.  Giles had only to kiss him
and wish him God-speed.  "Drop a pebble in the moat when you're ready
to start, Dick," he whispered.

The next minute Dick plunged in and disappeared in the darkness.  On
the farther side he dried himself down, according to Giles's
direction, with a towel from the bundle, which he afterwards hid
under a boulder, lest the Puritans should discover it and guess one
of their birds had flown out of Dent.  Then he dressed, dropped a
pebble in the moat, and then, with a beating heart, very cold and
very courageous, set off to find the field-path to Lumley.




CHAPTER VII

GILES'S MASTER

Giles, left behind, pictured many adventures that might have befallen
Dick in his two hours' walk in the dark, but he did not
foresee--perhaps because he did not know the field-path to
Lumley--what really befel.  Clouds coming up about two o'clock hid
the moon.  In the darkness Dick missed the bridge that crossed the
beck about a mile from the castle, and, having wandered some distance
out of his way, found himself suddenly overshoes in a bog.  He
floundered out again and left a shoe behind--floundered in again to
seek it--groped about, feeling the oozing mud over and round, but
failed to discover it--finally, after much squelching and sucking of
the mud, determined to leave it altogether.  To walk in one shoe is
not easy, to hop is most fatiguing.  Dick hurled the left shoe into
the swamp to keep the right one company, and set off to seek higher
ground, his ardour undamped--that is, in comparison with his person.
About an hour later it began to rain, first in light showers, then
faster.  Dick, coming into violent collision with a stone wall, crept
under the lee of it to wait till the rain ceased, for in the darkness
he was utterly lost.  When the dawn began to grow gray he rose and
looked about him.  Just before him was a roofless barn, and beyond
that the beck that he ought to have crossed higher up.  Reflecting
that he could not possibly be any wetter, Dick took off his stockings
and waded in.  The September morning was raw, and the water was cold.
It was deep, too, and there were slippery stones at the bottom.  Just
as he sprang for the bank his foot slipped, and he fell back with a
splash.  Away floated his stockings unheeded, and when he emerged,
wet, muddy, drabbled, bare-legged, scratched and bruised, he looked,
in fact, an excellent companion for Giles in his rags.

The King had his quarters in the manor-house at Lumley, and the Earl
of Newcastle was in command of his army.  Prince Rupert was there
too, and very anxious to occupy the earl's place.

A number of gentlemen were sitting at breakfast in their quarters--a
small farm close to the manor--when a tall cavalry-officer came
swaggering in, and, saluting, said with a laugh:

"More news of Dent, so please you.  Just being reported to my Lord of
Newcastle, but I have the messenger here."

"Bring him in," said the gentleman at the head of the table.

The officer retired, and came back in a moment with a boy,
bare-legged, and dirty, and torn.

"Ho!" said the gentleman.  "Who are you, my hedge-sparrow?"

"Sir Richard Chester of Dent," answered Dick, looking round the room,
and then long and earnestly at his questioner.  He thought he had
never seen anyone so beautiful, or so handsomely dressed.  The
gentleman wore a coat of tawny velvet with open sleeves, showing a
white cambric shirt with very fine lace at the wrists.  Over this he
had a sleeveless buff leather coat.  Round his throat was a gorgelet
of steel, over which fell a lace collar, and a richly-embroidered
baldric held his sword in a gold-tipped scabbard.  He had gold spurs
fastened to his long wrinkled riding-boots.  Such men and such
clothes had never been to Dent in Dick's lifetime.  He might well
regard them with awe.

"Sir Richard Chester!" said the gentleman, flicking a crumb from his
sleeve with a lace handkerchief, and returning Dick's stare with
good-humoured carelessness.  "There seem to be a good many baronets
in that family, gentlemen," and he smiled round the table.  His
friends laughed softly.

"Three within a month!" said one.  "Four, for 'tis barely a month
since the first Sir Reginald died."

"Four," said another gentleman.  "Sir Reginald the First, Sir
Reginald the Second, Sir John, and--"

"Sir Richard," said the first gentleman, and he pointed at Dick with
a beautiful white hand covered with jewels.

"I don't understand," said Dick, coming nearer, eagerly.

"Farther off," said the gentleman, pushing back his chair, but still
good-humouredly, "if you will be so good!  Thank you.  I perceive you
have been in a quagmire."

Dick had begun to feel hot and uncomfortable.  The gentlemen seemed
so indifferent to any news he might have, and they spoke so slowly,
and moved so negligently, that his preconceived ideas of his own
importance, and of a commanding officer's desire for information,
deserted him.  His nervousness made him aggressive.  That indefinable
something, that was not insolence, and yet was supreme indifference
to his feelings, vexed him bitterly, as Giles the stableman's manners
had vexed him when, the first day of the siege, he refused to let
down the bridge.  He clenched his hands, and, scowling, spoke up
quickly.

"I am Sir Richard Chester, and I have held Dent Castle for nearly a
week, I may tell you.  And I am come now to ask the King's
will--whether we hold it longer or whether we give it up, or how we
shall act."

"'Tis gracious of your honour to consult him," said the other gently.

"You will observe, sir, that the young gentleman is so used to
negotiating with sovereigns as a brother-potentate that he drops of
nature into the regal 'we'," said another gentleman in an
elaborately-explaining tone from the far end of the table.

Dick turned scowling to him, tossed back his clinging curls, and
simply glared at him.  The young gentleman covered his eyes, and
murmured: "I am scorched," almost inaudibly.

Dick was trembling with rage, and would have flown violently at him,
but for the restraining hand of the officer behind him.

"Osborne, where did you come across this young baronet?" enquired the
first speaker.

"In the ante-room of the Lord Newcastle's chamber, sir."

"You lie!  'Twas the pig-sty!" cried Dick.

The gentlemen laughed all at once, and the one at the head of the
table the loudest, at this.

"Nathless the earl's ante-chamber, my child," continued the officer.
"He had been sent on from a picquet beyond the river, having given
the name of Sir Richard Chester, and demanding the King or the
general commanding."

"I am Sir Richard Chester," said Dick again.

"But," said the gentleman, "you were drowned, you know, a week since,
in the Lum."

"I was not," said Dick stoutly.

"Yes, truly.  Gregory Balston yonder attended your funeral.  Did you
not, Gregory?"

"Upon my word I did, sir," said a young gentleman, setting down a
glass and nodding gravely "I was sharing tents with Dent--Captain
Dent--Captain Sir John Dent."

"One of the baronets of the family," murmured another.

"Precisely," said Balston, "having succeeded the interesting young
gentleman who fell into the Lum.  Captain Dent was on duty, so he
sent his secretary, one Master Purvis, to see the body, and he asked
me, as a friend, to attend upon his part."

"Thank you," said the gentleman in tawny.  "We quite well remember,
for Sir John claimed the barony the next evening, and promised to
raise a troop for the King."

Dick looked on helplessly, and could only say: "I never fell in the
Lum."

"You fell into the quagmire, you know," said the gentleman.

"And you fell into the pig-sty, you know," said the officer.

"Has Newcastle seen him?" asked the gentleman.

"No, sir.  He was engaged."

Just then another officer entered to say his lordship had asked for
the messenger from Dent.

"Come," said the gentleman, "we've not had a breath of Dent news yet,
sir.  Stay, sir, a moment.  Now, my boy, say what you want to say."

But Dick had gathered by now that this was not the general
commanding, and, remembering Giles's advice to give his news to no
one else--though rather late in the day,--he was dumb.

"Speak," said the gentleman.

"I will not," Dick retorted.  "You think I tell lies; and you tell
them about my being dead--that's a lie; and John Dent's not a
baronet--that's another!"

The other stood up.  "Dead or alive, your manners are quite
unbearable.  Take him away, sirs, and I'll follow."

Osborne handed him over to the new-comer, and Dick was marched off
down a passage to the Earl of Newcastle's quarters, the gentleman in
tawny clanking behind him.

Lord Newcastle was writing at a table as they entered his room, and
he rose and bowed.

"If you will have the goodness to bear with my company, my lord,"
said the gentleman, "I should be glad to hear news of Dent."

The earl handed him a chair.  "Now, boy," he said, turning to Dick
with some sternness, "what news of Dent?"

"I am Sir Richard Chester," Dick began.

The earl smiled slightly, and the other gentleman said: "If we might
suggest passing over styles and titles, and keeping strictly to
business, my lord--?"

"Go on," said the earl quietly.  "Have you come from Dent?"

"Yes," said Dick sullenly.

"Who is commanding there?"

"I am," said Dick.

The earl frowned.  "Tell the truth, sir," he said.

"I am," Dick persisted.  "We have held it for a week.  Yesterday we
learned artillery was coming, and Giles wished--"

"Who is Giles?" enquired the earl.

"Giles is--is--the stableman."  Dick flushed and stammered.

The two gentlemen laughed.

"Here is a story of a cock and a bull," the one in tawny said.
"Truly--behold the cock--of a fine hackle!"

Dick bit his lip.  He was very tired.  He thought all these people
very unreasonable; he was being disbelieved and ill-treated.  He was
cold and hungry, and he hated this gentleman.  Therefore, in spite of
his manhood, he wanted to cry.

"Proceed," said the earl patiently.  "What did Giles wish?"

"Giles wished to know," Dick faltered, "if the King--"

"Would give him a peerage," began the bantering gentleman.

The earl suddenly turned, as his servant announced someone to him in
a low voice.  "Oh, just remove this boy to your room, Dennison!" he
said hastily.  "See he breakfasts.  I shall want him again."

"Might I suggest a bath also," murmured the gentleman.

Taking Dick by the hand, the servant led him off to a small cupboard,
which was his room at the farm.  Here Dick found courage, after
breakfasting, to ask if he might have a wash; and, in washing, came
across the silk cord attached to Giles's golden token.

"I am a little fool!  I quite forgot it.  Who knows but one of these
gentlemen might have been Giles's master.  He would have befriended
me."

"Eh?" said the man in whose care he was.  "What is that about?"

"'Tis Giles's token," Dick answered vaguely.  "I'll try it when they
send for me again."

Just then the earl's voice was heard calling loudly on Dennison, who
came running back in a moment for Dick.

When they came into the room, Dick found it crowded with people.  The
Earl of Newcastle was speaking to a gentleman in black velvet, who
was leaning on a gold-headed cane.  Dick caught something about Dent.

"The first news was from Captain Dent, to say he had quitted the
castle before the orders reached it.  The second was from his
secretary, to say his cousin, young Sir Richard Chester, had been
drowned whilst fleeing from the enemy, and, as the next baronet, he
promised to raise a troop."

"Yes, yes," said the gentleman.

"Then," continued the earl, "there came a man from Dent village,
saying the Chesters' flag was floating again.  Then he came and
reported the castle besieged by the enemy, the flag still up, and a
garrison making sorties and capturing the enemy by the dozen.  He
said Sir Reginald Chester was in command."

"He being dead," put in Dick's first questioner.  "I believe they are
all dead in that family; but, being loyal, have come back to help us.
This pygmy says he is Sir Richard."

Every eye was turned on Dick.

"Ay, sir; to-day comes this boy," said my Lord Newcastle, "saying the
garrison is composed of himself and a stableman, and that he has come
through the enemy's lines for assistance."

"And through a variety of other things also, as we perceive," said
Dick's tormentor, pointing to his mud-stained clothes.

The gentleman in black tapped Dick on the shoulder with his cane,
saying:

"What is your name, friend?"

"Dick Chester," answered the boy, and he held up a bright object
dangling from a silk string.

"Ha! and what have we there?" asked the gentleman with a slight smile.

"It's Giles's.  He gave it to me, and said the man who had the other
half was his master, and would believe all I said."

One of them took the token, and Dick watched anxiously as it passed
from hand to hand.  His heart sank as one after another handed it on
without owning to it.  At last it came to the gentleman whom he
hated, who shook his head mockingly, and was about to toss it back to
Dick when the gentleman in black took it from him.

"By your leave, Nephew," he said.

Seating himself in the earl's chair, he laid the token on his knee,
and, having felt in his pockets, presently laid another bright half
beside it.  They fitted.  He looked up with a whimsical smile.
"Evidently," he said, "I am the man."

Dick came forward.  "You are Giles's master, then," he said.

"And this belonged to Giles the stableman?"

Dick nodded.  "Yes, and my lieutenant at Dent.  He should have been
captain, but refused it."

"In favour of whom?"

"Me," said Dick, gaining confidence.  "I claimed it because it was my
castle, but I wanted him to have it very soon, for he was a better
man than I."

"A better man never stepped," said the other, repressing a laugh.
"But if he had a better, 'twould be you.  Now, come--Dick, is
it?--come, Dick, then, let us have the news of Dent from beginning to
end."

He drew the boy to his side, and, whilst the rest of the company
stood wondering by, Dick gave the history of the siege, from the
moment when he swam the moat to get in, to the moment when he swam
the moat to get out.  He told all about Giles, who had been found
starving by the road-side, of his wonderful wisdom, and of the
treachery of John Dent.

"Is it to be believed?" queried the Earl of Newcastle.

"Every word, my lord," said the gentleman in black; "I vouch for
every word that comes from Giles the stableman."  His lips twitched
with amusement, and, beckoning the earl to come nearer, he whispered
in his ear.  The earl started and looked round at Dick.

"There isn't a doubt of it," said the gentleman in black, rising.

"The Chesters were all madmen," said the earl.

"A very good kind of madness, however," said the other, patting
Dick's shoulder.  "Now, my lord, will you be so good as to relieve
Dent, sending a special messenger from us to the officer commanding,
to come as he is, and on peril of our displeasure to alter a rag of
his apparel."

"Ah, he said it would make you laugh!" Dick observed.

The gentleman laughed heartily.  "So it does," he said gaily.  "So he
is Giles, is he?  A stable-man, eh?"

"Yes, sir," said Dick,

"So be it, then," said Giles's master.  "And now, will you stay with
my Lord Newcastle here till Giles comes?"

"May I not ride with the troops to bring him in?" Dick requested.

He did not understand the ways of these gentlemen, and was very much
afraid of being left alone with any one of them.

"By no means," said the gentleman in tawny, shaking his head.  "If we
find no Giles at Dent, if we find you've been romancing, the
Provost-Marshal will want you, youngster.  The whipping-post"--he
rolled his eyes,--"the stocks, then chased out of the camp."

"Nephew," said the gentleman in black, "I beg you will desist.  Sir
Richard Chester stands in no danger of such things."

Lord Newcastle came up to Dick with a friendly smile.

"Now, sir, will you go with me?"

Dick hung back, and the gentleman in tawny laughed.

"He mislikes you, my lord.  Hey! he shall choose amongst us.  Dick,
my gallant, wilt come with me?"

"Not I, sir," said Dick promptly, stepping to the side of Giles's
master.  "I will go with you," he said, taking his hand.

Half the people in the room sprang forward as if to drag him back,
but the gentleman seemed more pleased than otherwise.  He waved back
the one in tawny.

"Eh, Nephew?" he said; "you cannot say his choice is a bad one.  Do
not follow me, I thank you."

And holding Dick's hand, he walked slowly out of the room.




CHAPTER VIII

DICK'S DISAPPEARANCE

As Dick and his new friend crossed the meadow that divided the farm
from Lumley Manor, everyone they met saluted.  The people looked
after Dick with marked wonder that did not escape him, tired and
confused as he felt.  He thought Giles's master must be some great
lord or other, and that these men wondered at his condescension
towards himself.

"They don't know who I am," he thought, "nor what Giles and I have
done."

And rather proud of the great man's interest in him, he pressed
closer to his side and addressed him with a confidence which
something in his companion's bearing kept from being too free.  They
were the beat friends in the world by the time they had sat together
half an hour in the manor-house parlour.  There was not a single
thing left untold about Giles or himself, Dick considered.  There
were a great many questions to be asked of Giles's master, only
unfortunately Dick was so sleepy that no words could come to his
mind.  He was annoyed to find that while the gentleman spoke to him
his head would nod, and that, unless he rubbed his eyes very hard and
very frequently, the room and the gentleman kept fading out of sight.
He tried to sit straight on the cushioned window-seat, but found
himself slipping down in a most undignified manner over and over
again.

"I should think a person might keep awake better," he said in an
anxiously polite tone, "had he his head on--a--a--level with--with--"

"With the said person's feet," suggested the gentleman.  "Decidedly."

Before Dick could make any effort to achieve the desired position he
found himself lying full-length on the cushions, in the most restful
attitude imaginable, with a cloak thrown over him.

"I fancy," the gentleman observed gravely, "that a person could keep
awake better did he first sleep."

Dick closed his eyes.

"Will you tell me when Giles comes, sir?" he said.  "I must be ready
to run out and meet him.  Dear Giles!"

"It seems to me you love Giles from the bottom of your heart, and
don't give the least trifle to any other creature."

Dick curled himself into more luxurious comfort.

"Is no one else," he observed.

"No father or mother, I am aware," said the gentleman thoughtfully;
"but have you not a brother?"

"No," said Dick sleepily; "he's dead."

"Oh, then Giles has it all, has he?  None left over for--the King,
for instance?" and the gentleman twisted his moustache and regarded
him with an amused expression.

"The King?  No," said Dick solemnly.  "One would not love a king, you
know.  'Tis not possible.  One would fear the King--"

"I see," said the gentleman, inclining his head.

"But I think I love you, sir," Dick said shyly.  "Giles does--and
Giles--"

His eyes closed just as he felt the gentleman's hand on his hair.

"Then there's nothing to complain of, Dick," he heard him saying, and
then was asleep in a second.

Dick slept peacefully hour after hour.  It was quite dark in the
manor-house parlour when he awoke.  He lay a minute trying to
remember where he was and what had happened.  Then he heard the
sentries pacing up and down outside the closed door, and looking
round the room, found it empty.  He threw off the cloak and got up.
His eyes caught the glitter of something brilliant on a table in a
dark corner.  Boy-like, he must needs go to see what it was.  It was
a cluster of diamonds in the hat-band of Giles's master.  The hat lay
on the table, with a pair of perfumed gloves, the gold-headed cane,
and a little Latin book.  Dick stood, winking back at the winking
diamonds, feeling very happy, listening to the bugle-calls without,
to the steady tramp of the sentry, to the hum of conversation in the
next room, where he now and then recognized the voice of Giles's
master.  He was in the midst of friends, quite safe to all
appearance, so hemmed in with the safeties that surround the near
presence of a king that had he been conscious of an enemy he would
have felt no fear, and no one need have the least fear on his account
it seemed.

About five minutes after he got up there was a great noise of
cheering in the camp, and not ten minutes had gone by before the door
flew open, and Giles entered in his rags, followed by his master and
Dick's tormentor, and the Earl of Newcastle.

They looked round the room.  The boy was gone.

"Dick!" Giles cried gaily; and then again louder: "Dick!"

But there was no answer.

Giles looked under the table.  The gentleman in tawny laughed.

"Were our young friend at all of a shy or retiring disposition," he
said, "one would fancy he had been overcome with confusion at your
graciousness, Uncle."

"He fell asleep on the window-seat yonder," said Giles's master.

The gentleman went up and patted the window-seat, and shook his head.

"All solid," he said.  "Can't have gone through."

"Have the goodness to question the sentry, and the guard in the
hall," said Giles's master to a gentleman behind in the passage.

The earl followed him, and returned in a few moments to say the
sentry and guard all assured them that no one had passed for any
purpose.  The sentry had looked in twenty minutes before, according
to his orders, and the young gentleman was sleeping quietly on the
window-sill.  There had never been any sound from the room.

Giles took a turn through the chamber whilst the rest stood silently
contemplating each other.  Then he began a rapid search of the walls,
till he came to that part which was behind Dick as he stood by the
table.

In the panelled oak Giles's finger, warily moving, found an
inequality; a spring gave way under pressure, and a door in the wall
flew back.

"Hum!" said the one in tawny, and his face changed from gay
indifference to interest.

"'Sdeath!" Giles muttered, and passed through into a dark narrow
passage, stone-flagged, that led to a door into the garden, concealed
outside by a great hedge of yew.  The hedge was hollow, having a
passage up the middle.  Giles and the gentleman went up, and came out
at the end into a wood, and then into a meadow, where some of the raw
recruits were returning from drill.  The gentleman went down to the
officer in charge, and questioned him closely.  He was a mild-eyed
countryman.  He had seen no one come out of the wood, but they had
only been there ten minutes.  Surely there was a misapprehension; no
path led from that side of the manor; there was no door on that side.
The gentleman bade him go back to the drilling of chaw-bacons.

Giles had waited impatiently while he made his enquiries.  They came
back together, but the other hurried off to his quarters immediately,
being wearied of looking for needles in bottles of hay, as he put it,
waving his hand to the world, as it were, and adding: "Shall one
child be found that is lost in England at this day?"

"This child shall be found," said Giles's master quietly.  "My Lord
Newcastle, you will send out to search everywhere for him."  Then he
laid his hand on Giles's shoulder.  "Of what are you thinking?" he
asked.

"Of John Dent," said Giles grimly.

"John Dent was arrested four hours ago, sir, said the earl.

"And is he still in ward?" Giles's master demanded.

"Enquiries shall be made," and the earl bowed and retired.

In ten minutes he was back.  "John Dent is gone," he said briefly.

Giles stood for a moment thoughtfully, with bent head.

"If you will be so good, my lord," said Giles's master, "as to make
out a commission for my friend here, as I directed, and to draw on
all loyal persons, in the King's name, for assistance to the utmost,
with power to take troops at his pleasure, and a pass to go
whithersoever he wills, I shall be glad."

Giles looked up.  "I thank you--" he began, and the earl, bowing
hastily, left master and servant alone.




CHAPTER IX

MASTER PURVIS TELLS A TALE

And what had become of little Dick Chester?

He was standing by the table, as I have said, when suddenly, without
the sound of an opening door, or the fall of a footstep behind him, a
great cloak was thrown over his head, and wound tightly round his
body; he was lifted off his feet silently, and borne off, he knew not
by whom or whither.  It was useless to struggle or cry out, for he
was almost smothered, and his captor's arms were as strong as his
step was swift and silent.  Yet Dick writhed and trembled in despair
for he knew not how long, till he heard a horse stamping close by.
Then he felt himself lifted up.  Another pair of arms, steel-clad and
unyielding, received him.  He was on the back of a horse.  Then there
was the sound of a man dropping into the saddle close to him.
Bridles jingled, saddles creaked, scabbards tapped spurred heels, but
no one spoke.  Then eight hoofs beat the earth together, and Dick
found, by the sway of the man who now held him, that they were going
at a hand-gallop, and by the thud, thud at their side that another
rider accompanied them.

On and on they went in that appalling silence, never speaking or
making any human sound.  The horses snorted occasionally, but he that
held Dick never seemed to breathe.  Terror, and the heat of the thick
cloak, and the wild pace together made Dick sick and giddy.  He made
one or two desperate efforts to get his hands free, but they were
useless, and he lay still again, trembling and choking.  Perhaps he
fainted, or perhaps he slept, but anyhow, when the smothering cloak
was at last removed, he found himself in a dismal little chamber,
with a high grated slit in the wall far out of reach.  A man was
standing over him, holding a light.

"Eat your supper," he said sternly, pointing to a plate of bread and
meat, "and then go to sleep."

Dick begged him to say where he was, who had brought him there, and
what for.  But the man relapsed into silence, and went out and locked
the door after him.  Dick rushed to it, and called, and entreated,
and cried, but nobody came; and when he listened, the silence was
unbroken and terrible.

But there were other people in the house--a lonely farmhouse, miles
away from Lumley, in the midst of desolate moors.

At the end of a long passage was a room with fire and lights, and
there John Dent, in armour, looking very hard and dangerous, was
striding up and down restlessly, his hand on the hilt of his sword.
He had been arrested, on Dick's information, as a traitor, and
awaiting the arrival of Giles to bear testimony against him, had been
confined to his quarters, from whence he had escaped.  He had with
him his servant, Newton, and he had met at this farm Master Purvis,
who lodged there, and a renegade Cavalier--broken, that is, dismissed
from his regiment, for neglecting his duty.

A few days ago John Dent had been perfectly satisfied with
everything.  His cousin had been drowned--so he supposed--and he had
succeeded to his title and possessions.  These were assured to him if
the King proved successful in his struggle with the Parliament, for
he had curried favour by offering to raise and arm a troop.  If the
king failed, he was ready to go over to the victors, for whom he had
done several services already--such as agreeing to vacate Dent for
them to go into.

And now, to-day, not only had he been charged with his treason, not
only had Dick inconsiderately come to life again, but he had heard
that his title and estates were gone.  No wonder he felt bitter
hatred against Dick, and a wild anger against the stableman whom he
had helped on the highroad, and who had turned all his plans upside
down.  He could not endure to leave Dick unpunished and to escape
himself without some, however slight, revenge; and Newton, his
servant, found out, through a man who had worked at the manor, the
entrance, by the yew-hedge, and the secret door to the parlour.
Knowing Giles's master was at a council, the servant had entered
softly and succeeded in capturing Dick, John Dent having promised a
high reward if he did it unseen.

Having got him, the question was: What should be done with the boy?
Master Purvis could only puff out his fat cheeks and say: "No, no,"
as though someone had already suggested a deed he dared not
contemplate.  Perhaps he saw the suggestion in John Dent's hard face
as he paced up and down uneasily.  But Newton, who was full of
resource, knew of the very thing, he assured his good master, which
could be worked easily for a trifling sum.

"Go on, sirrah," said Captain Dent shortly.

It appeared that Newton had a half-sister in the south somewhere,
whose husband kept an inn.  They had just lost their only son, and
were anxious to adopt a strong lad who would make himself a bit
useful about the place.  Adopting, as Newton said, grinning, was so
much less expensive than hiring a boy.  Now, couldn't the young
gentleman be taken there immediately, to lie snug until his honour
wanted him, or until he had other plans for him?  His half-sister's
husband was a thrifty man and hard-working, and his sister a sharp
woman.  They'd keep the boy out of mischief, and active employment,
as his honour knew, was healthy.  To be sure, he would have to work;
but then none would take him for nothing.  And if his honour wanted
to be sure of his staying where he was put--Newton paused,--why, he
couldn't expect to pick him a home anywhere, with anyone, as his
honour would quite understand.

Captain Dent paced the room more slowly.  "An inn?" he said at last.
"Every kind of traveller stays at an inn.  Dick will get hold of some
Royalist or other, and tell his tale while he waters his horse for
him."

Newton had nothing to say to this.  But the dismissed Cavalier
officer cut in.  "Would he be believed, think you?  I heard from
Newton that it went hard with him amongst the officers at first."

"Ay," said Newton.  "I heard the earl's groom say that he was almost
whipped away for a liar.  Anyhow, he refused to stay with them, for,
they say, someone frightened him by saying he must stay till his
story was proven, as the Provost-Marshal would need him for a
thrashing."

John Dent stopped by Master Purvis.  "Go you," he said sternly, "and
tell the boy his tale was not proven; that there was no Giles at Dent
Castle; that all the King's host know, or will know, that he is a
liar; that he is under the King's severest displeasure.  He will
believe you.  Don't mention my name, on your peril.  Teach him to
fear the very air round a Cavalier of any rank.  Say, if he breathes
the name of Chester anywhere in England, every King's man has orders
to hale him to the whipping-post and the stocks.  Say you've saved
him at the risk of your life; you were fond of him.  Say what you
like; but make haste, and let it be well done, or--"

"I go, I go!" said Master Purvis hurriedly, and he went out of the
room.  "They'll kill him, if he gives any trouble," he thought; "and
Captain Dent will kill me if I fail him.  For all sakes he must be
made to believe as they tell him."

He found Dick crouched on the floor in one corner, but as the moon
fell through the grating on Master Purvis's round figure, Dick
recognized him, and sprang to his feet with a cry of joy.  Master
Purvis had been kind to him at Dent.  It was he who had given him the
dagger with the red-leather sheath on his birthday.  Master Purvis
had come to save him, for he was his friend.

But Master Purvis sat down on the floor and told him such a tale as
went near breaking Dick's heart.  There was no Giles at Dent; no sign
of an enemy there either.  It was all as Master Purvis had left it a
week since.  Everybody believed Dick a liar and no more Sir Richard
Chester than he, Master Purvis, was.  Through all the army, and to
all loyal persons, a proclamation had been sent denouncing Dick as a
traitor, who had tried, and almost succeeded, in luring the King's
forces into a trap.  The King himself had expressed his endless
displeasure, without hope of a pardon, and the Earl of Newcastle had
issued an order to every man, of what rank in the King's forces
soever, to take, whip, and brand any boy giving the name of Dick
Chester.  And the Provost-Marshal was waiting, prepared to deal him
justice, when he, Master Purvis, had engaged a friend to rush in
softly and kidnap poor Dick.

To a broken question about the gentleman who had been so good to him,
Master Purvis made up a swift reply that the gentleman had not
believed anything against him at first, but did now, and would never
forgive him.  The tale came on so swiftly, almost without a pause,
the facts followed each other so glibly, that Master Purvis was
almost proud of his achievement, and more than convinced of the
effect it had upon Dick.

"And so," ended Master Purvis, "you must go quietly away to some
friends of mine till I can come for you.  Newton will take you--a
good faithful servant; and you must be obedient and silent, and he
will take all care of you."

Master Purvis got up here nervously, for the misery on Dick's white
face spoilt the flow of his sentences.  He felt he was doing the best
for the boy, and had made himself think that Dick ought to be
grateful.

"Be sure you never say your name," he said hastily, "nor breathe a
word of your story."  He opened the door.  Dick sprang after him.

"Giles!" he cried.  "Giles!  Where is Giles?"

"I don't know," said Master Purvis, shaking him off.  "Perhaps dead.
Most likely dead," he added, desiring, of all things, to get away
from Dick's agonized eyes, and the tones of his voice, and the touch
of his hands.

Master Purvis came back to his master quite out of breath.  Captain
Dent was still pacing the floor.

"Have you done the business?" he questioned sharply.

"Yes," panted Master Purvis.

"Have you frightened him thoroughly from confiding in Royalists of
any sort?"

"Yes; I think--Nay, I'm sure," Master Purvis answered.

The ex-Cavalier laughed.  "You ought to make quite sure," he said.

Captain Dent, suddenly halting by the officer, said: "You might meet
him and Newton on the way, and carry out some of His Majesty's
orders.  But you may go short of dragging him back to the Provost."

"Ay, I might, if you make it worth while," said the other coolly.

"He won't know you're broken," said Dent.  "And there's nothing like
feeling for believing."

"True," rejoined the other.  "And we'll see which feels more broken.
Terms?" he added, and they discussed them.

Then Dent left the farm, and the ex-Cavalier shortly followed him.

In the early morning, Master Purvis took Dick some breakfast, which
he did not eat; afterwards set him before Newton on horseback, and
watched them gallop off with a sigh of relief.  Master Purvis was
selfish, so selfish that he did not care even to see anything
painful, and there was something very painful in the silence of Dick.

All the day he was silent, did not even cry, did not eat or drink,
scarcely moved.  They slept at an inn, and started again in the early
morning.  Dick put one or two questions, but in a dull way, merely
about the length of their journey, for bodily weariness was now his
most conscious feeling.  He had no chance of escaping had he dreamt
of anything of the sort, which he did not.  He only wanted to stop
riding, to rest, and he had a queer feeling that, if they were to
stop for a whole day, he would fall asleep, and wake up to find it
was all a bad dream.  But they never stopped, except for an hour or
two.

Newton changed his horse on the second day and on the fourth.  On
that day Dick asked more questions.  "When did Newton think Master
Purvis would come to his friends in the south?"  Newton couldn't say.
Dick did not like Newton, and towards the evening of the fourth day
he began to be troublesome.  He had been sick in the morning, and was
inclined to a sullen resistance simply for the relief of resisting.
And now he cried and was peevish, would rather stay and starve where
they were than go farther.

"The first Royalist we meet will save you from starving," Newton said
meaningly.

And just then there came into sight round a bend of the road a
Cavalier, gaily dressed, well mounted, with a servant behind him.
This was the ex-officer, and he felt a certain amusement in the part
he was now playing.  He seemed to be riding by, but suddenly reined
up, and looked sharply at Dick.

"Hold!" he shouted.  "That boy is wanted by the King's
Provost-Marshal."

Dick's heart was in his mouth.  Newton drew up, and stammered out
something with well-feigned confusion.

"Hand him over, sirrah, and don't gibber," snapped the officer.  "The
earl has given his orders about this matter.  All the officers intend
to be present, let me tell you!"

Dick shivered.  He thought of all those gay gentlemen looking on at
his shame.  He knew how indifferent and good-humoured their faces
would be, how they would jest courteously with each other, and care
not a jot for the boy who, they said, had lied to them brazenly.  And
Giles's master would be there!  He had been so kind, and had trusted
him so thoroughly.

Newton set him down on the ground.  The officer had dismounted too.
Dick, utterly misled by the tale he had been told, and quite in
despair, flung himself at the officer's feet, and begged him to kill
him there, not to take him back--to have mercy and kill him there.

"Not that!" Dick cried.  "I can die here, but not before them!  For
pity's sake, spare me!"

The man's hard face flushed a little.  He remembered his own shame
when, before the troops, he was degraded and sent from the army.

Newton muttered impatiently: "Thrash him, Major, and let us be gone."

But Dick, seeing some signs of relenting, sprang to his feet, and
pointed to the pistols in the nearest holster.  "Shoot me!" he said
steadily, ceasing to cry and to tremble.  "I did not lie to them!
Shoot me here!  Don't take me back!  I'll stand still!"

Dick heard the chink of gold coins as the major stood with his hands
in his pockets.

The major's face twitched.  Somehow the game had lost its amusement.
He took hold of Dick and swung him up before Newton.  Then he mounted
his own horse.

"The money in your pocket?" said Newton insolently.

The officer reined in so suddenly that his charger reared in the air.
He plunged his hand in his pocket and dashed the gold pieces on the
ground.  Then he struck in the spurs and galloped off, followed by
his man.

Newton dismounted, gathered up the pieces, and rode off with Dick,
laughing.  "That's the fault of being a gentleman, my chuck," he said
roughly.  "However degraded you are you can never rely on yourself.
A pinch too much dirt and--fah!--your gentleman's nose tilts.  A bit
of a whine from a weakling, like you, and--eh, dear me!--my
gentleman's blood boils, and turns him soft again!"




CHAPTER X

THE INN-KEEPER'S BOY

The Seven Thorns was a lonely place.  The long dusty road ran past it
to the hills, and the country was desolate and wild.  The road sloped
down to the east and up to the west.  As far as you could see to the
east swept the trees of the Forest of Arne, and in a clearing, out of
sight save for the smoke-wreaths and the church weathercock, lay
Arncastor, the county town.  There was nothing to the west but the
sunset, where the white road ran out of sight into the sky, as it
seemed.

Master Tomlinson and his wife Mistress Joan, and his cow and three
pigs, a mongrel dog, some fowls, and "the boy" lived at the inn.  It
was not a place of good repute, for tradition said that travellers
were robbed there.  In quiet times Master Tomlinson had but little
custom, but in these days the road was busy and the inn much
frequented.  Now a party of the King's horse would clatter up to the
door, with waving plumes and jingling spurs, and rainbow coats and
sashes.  Anon, next week, maybe, a Puritan regiment would gallop up
soberly, with grave, earnest faces under their steel head-pieces, and
plain suits, and long swords clanking at their sides.  Then would
pass a party of travellers: a Royalist parson and his family, driven
from the rectory-house, going they knew not whither.  And to-morrow a
Puritan divine, grave and pious, exhorting men to repentance, and
denouncing the King and his gallants and the ladies of the Queen.
Once or twice there was a skirmish between rival parties in the
inn-yard, with oaths and cries and groans and great confusion.  These
scenes Master Tomlinson abhorred, for they meant that one or maybe
both of the parties would ride off without paying the score.

Every week, on a Friday, Mistress Tomlinson rode over on the old
white horse to Arncastor to buy necessaries for the house.  Master
Tomlinson never went with her, nor did she take the boy.  Her
husband's work was to lounge beside the door and wait for travellers,
be polite to them if it seemed worth while, protesting he was all for
the King to the Cavaliers, and all for the Parliament to the
Puritans.  He would carry the dishes and wait upon the officers, and
drink, at their expense, confusion to the King to-day and to his
enemies to-morrow.

The boy's duties were manifold: to rise at four, to go to his bed--a
heap of straw--when Master Tomlinson had done with him, to make the
fire and sweep the kitchens, to feed the pigs and clean the stables,
to carry wood and wash the dishes, to hold and water tired horses, to
draw the ale and wait on the common soldiers and low-class
travellers, to turn the spits and dodge the blows, to bear burdens
and get kicks and buffets, to eat his food where and when it could be
found, to hear foul language, to see all things ugly and unpleasant,
and to be always alert, always ready to obey.  This was the business
of the boy at the Seven Thorns, under the stick of the host, and the
open hand of Dame Joan, and the promiscuous compliments of everybody
else--a belt to-day from the trooper whose ale did not suit him, a
switch to-morrow from the Cavalier whose stirrup he forgot to hold,
the flat of an irritable officer's sword or a boot at his head from
another, the shrill recriminations of some woman on whose dress he
had spilled, or long exhortations from some Puritan preacher.  Always
ill-clothed, badly shod, in the bitterest weather, with work always
to be done, and eyes swollen with crying, with bruises and wheals
generally fresh and aching somewhere, Dick Chester served for six
months as the boy of the inn.

Master Purvis never came.  There was nothing else to hope for.  The
Cavaliers were his constant dread, lest, recognizing him, they should
hale him back to exhibit him as a liar, and disgrace him.  His spirit
was broken.  Had he thought of flight, whither could he fly?  He had
neither friend nor hope anywhere in the world.  Giles was dead, or he
would not have deserted him and covered him with dishonour.  He was
an outcast, one who lived under a ban.  He never asked for pity after
the first month, or looked for any mercy; Master Tomlinson cured him
of that.  If he ever dreamed of escaping he was checked by that fear
of detection, for, child-like, he never thought that the world would
have forgotten him completely in a week.  Surely the Cavaliers all
knew of him!  He turned pale and trembled under their indifferent
glances, for might not one of them recognize him, as the gentleman on
the road had done?  And he might not be suddenly turned to mercy, as
that one had been, and then--!

There is no knowing how long Dick might have lived at the Seven
Thorns but for an event which happened at the beginning of April.
Perhaps he would have stayed there all his life, and grown from a
cowed, terrified child into a stupid, ignorant man.  He had been
trustful, easily led, and so deeply impressed by Master Purvis's tale
that he accepted his position without a word.  Truthful, kindly, very
simple, he had no idea of others deceiving him to this extent.  Had
John Dent appeared at all in this business he might have suspected
trickery, but fat, dull Master Purvis, whom he had known all his
life, carried no fear to his mind.  Master Purvis had heard of his
danger, and had saved him.  Dick had always teased and despised
Master Purvis, but now he was the only creature he thought of as a
friend in the wide world.

It was on a gusty April day that Dick, feeding the pigs in the early
morning, saw a troop of Parliamentarians gallop up to the inn door.
He was about to run out to hold their horses when something in their
bearing, and their haste, and the way they glanced behind them to the
west, struck him.  The troop did not dismount; only two soldiers
swung themselves from their saddles, rushed into the inn, and
returned in a moment, bringing with them Master Tomlinson, who was
entreating, expostulating, and explaining all in a breath.

Dick had hidden himself in the yard, but he could hear the stern
voice of the Puritan commander charging the host with some falseness
that had led him and his men into the midst of a force three times
their size.  In vain Master Tomlinson denied all knowledge; in vain
he protested 'twas all a mistake, that he had fully believed the
King's force to be small.  Dick could not catch all that was being
said as to how and when the host had given the misleading
information.  But he saw the soldiers bind his hands, and put him up
before one of their companions.  Then out dashed Mistress Joan with
tears and screams for her poor husband, and the officer was a kind
man and would have pity, she was sure.  And they were poor folks, he
must observe, and had to turn a penny how they could in these bad
days.

"Forward!" cried the officer.

But Mistress Joan clung to his stirrup, and entreated and threatened,
betraying so exact a knowledge of facts that the Puritan did not deem
it safe to leave her behind.  A warning cry from the rear made him
look round.  There was a dust-cloud on the sky-line.

"Turn her apron over her head," he commanded.  "Up with her!"

Dick saw the dame hoisted up before a trooper, wringing her hands and
filling the air with muffled wails.

"Forward!" again shouted the officer, and they were off down the hill
with a swirl of wind and a clatter of hoofs, and in five minutes out
of sight in the Forest of Arne.

Dick, wondering and frightened, had just gathered up enough courage
to step from behind the haystacks when, with horses spume-flecked and
riders swaying, past swept a Royalist troop at a hand-gallop, the
earth shaking as they went by.  Five minutes had scarcely passed
before a long train of horsemen came more slowly down the road, with
silken guidons fluttering in the April wind and the sun glittering on
armour and bridle-chains.  Dick's heart stood still.  In the
midst--tallest, handsomest, most debonnair--rode the gentleman who
had teased and threatened him at Lumley.  He had taken off his
helmet, and was fanning himself with a lace handkerchief, commenting
at the same time on the heat, the dust, and the tiresome haste of the
enemy.  He broke off to point at the seven thorn-trees by the inn
door, then to the sign.  He called an order, and he and his cavalry
rode slowly on, leaving two officers and about a dozen men behind.
They came into the yard, and discovered the boy behind the hay-ricks.
They drove the cow off from her pasture, and led out the old white
horse.  The ducks were driven from their pond, and the pigs,
squeaking and grunting, from their sty.  They killed the cocks and
hens, and the mongrel dog, who interfered injudiciously.  They cut up
the hay-ricks and bore them off in sections, and took all the corn
they could find in the granaries.

Dick, meanwhile, stood quaking at the officers' mercy, being
questioned, and giving confused replies.  He did not dare to look up,
fearing recognition.  He knew both the gentlemen--one was called
Balston, and had declared he had attended Dick's funeral, and the
other was Captain Osborne, who had taken him before the teasing
gentleman and his friends at Lumley.

"Was the man Tomlinson your father?" asked Osborne.

"No, sir," said Dick.

"Do you know where he is?"

"Gone with the enemy."

"With the rebels?  Come--answer!"

Dick replied, and after much questioning they got from him the
account of how Tomlinson and Dame Joan had been carried off.

"Ha!  Traitor to both sides, of course," said Balston.

They dismounted and went into the house, leaving their chargers in
Dick's care.  He could hear them talking in the hall.

"We must take him," said Osborne.

"Take that dirty boy with us?  Heavens and earth, Osborne!  I'd as
soon take a sack of coals!"

"Orders," said the other.  "He can ride behind me, if you're afraid
he'll soil your armour, my over-delicate gentleman.  Or, 'slife,
we'll give him a bath first in the pond."

Dick heard.  He was lost!  Quick as lightning terror woke the desire
for escape at any cost.  He slipped the horses' bridles over the
gate-post, ran into the stables softly, passed through a door at the
back, raced down a meadow, and hot, sick, with a wildly-beating
heart, crouched under some bushes out of sight.  He was sure the
officers had recognized him, and that their chief had sent them to
the Seven Thorns on purpose to arrest him, whereas their orders
merely were to attach anyone at the inn, so that he might be
questioned as to the Puritans' movements, which, it was supposed,
were well known there.  Dick lay still until he recovered his breath,
and then ran away aimlessly across the fields till he was tired,
pausing every now and then to listen for pursuit.  He soon felt a
lack--the lack of even the one piece of bread that would have been
his breakfast at the inn.  Being sure he was not followed, he lay
down to rest under a budding chestnut-tree, and fell asleep.  He woke
fancying Master Tomlinson was whipping him, and found the rain
beating his bare neck and legs.  His only clothing consisted of a
fragmentary shirt, and breeches that would have disgraced a
scarecrow.  Mistress Tomlinson had taken away the shoes and stockings
she had lent him for the winter, saying, now spring had come, he had
no need to wear out good woollen hose and leather shoes.  A forlorn
little object, with a cough that belied the good lady's opinion about
warm clothing, he wandered over the country through the pouring rain.
There was no road where he went, and he came to neither farm nor
cottage.  Cold and wet and hungry he had often been at the inn, and
to-day he was neither struck nor scolded.  There was no work to do,
and if only there were some shelter to be found, he could lie down
again and go to sleep.  He thought very much of Giles as he wandered
on.  At the inn he had never had one moment for dreaming, but now he
remembered all that had happened at Dent, and all that Giles and he
had talked about.

But thinking did not satisfy hunger.  The thought of a piece of dry
crust and an onion, or, may be, a piece of cold bacon, made his mouth
water, and as his strength failed him he cried bitterly for food.  He
was more faint and tired and wretched than he had ever been, even on
the worst day at the inn.  In his ignorance of death, thinking it
would come very quickly, worn out and broken spirited he lay down
towards evening to wait for it.

Death was tardy, and in two hours' time he was fainter, but as much
alive to discomfort as before.  Trudging on again, he knew not how,
he came upon a deep, mossy lane, with primroses growing on its steep,
high banks, and hare-bells drooping in the wind.  Dick climbed, or
rather rolled, down into the lane.  Surely it would lead him to some
dwelling, and every feeling was merged now into the desire for food.
The stones and ruts cut his feet, and exhaustion made him dizzy.  He
slipped and fell; rose and stumbled on again twice.  The third time
he did not get up.  It had ceased to seem worth while.  It was
getting dark and eerie, but he lay quite still.  Half-starved always,
one day of hard walking, absolutely without food, had been too much
for Richard Chester.  His last thought was of Giles.




CHAPTER XI

THE LADY DOROTHY BYNG

The next traveller down the lane was a dog--a great black retriever
with the most benevolent brown eyes.  He came splashing down through
the puddles, and overshot the mysterious heap by the roadside, though
he sniffed something.  Plunging back, he described a circle, with a
suspicious stiffening of the tail, and smelt at Dick.  "Boy" was his
decision.  "Strange, dirty boy; must be growled at."  The dog growled
accordingly, but the boy took no notice.  Insufferable impertinence!
With great indignation the dog lifted his nose and barked.  At this
point an old man in a gray livery suit, wrapped in a big cloak, came
round the corner.

"What's there, Lorry?" he asked, stopping.

The dog, with every appearance of thirsting for Dick's blood, barked
back that it was an orchard-robber, a stealer of chickens, a
vagabond, a tramp.  The old man pushed him aside, and, kneeling down,
ran his fingers over Dick's bruised, bony little person.

"Case o' starvation, Lorry, my friend," he observed.

Lorry snorted, as if he knew different, and then he barked angrily,
by way of discouraging the old servant still further.  But the man
shook his head, and lifted Dick out of the wet and muddy ditch.

"My Lady would fair eat me if I left him here to die, Lorry," he
said, and wrapped the boy in his cloak.

Lorry eyed this move with contempt, and as the old man started down
the lane carrying Dick in his arms, he rushed on ahead at a splashing
canter and with an angry sway of the tail.  He stated in a series of
snapping barks that he was going on to tell someone what a very silly
old man this was.  With this amiable intention he found his way
through a gate with stone pillars at the sides, up a broad avenue, to
a door.  Lorry barked for admittance, and made the steps as muddy as
he could in the meantime.  Presently the door opened a little, and a
young lady looked out, reproachfully.

"To the back-door, an' it please you!" she said severely.  "Would you
have the hall flags looking thus?"  She pointed down at the muddy
steps.

Lorry explained by barks that this really was an exceptional
occasion.  Unless he informed her in time, Philip would certainly
carry in at the back-door a dirty, indifferent ragamuffin of a boy.
He was still arguing the case when the young lady, with her own eyes,
saw Philip coming carrying a ragged boy, just as Lorry was telling
her he would.  Forgetting her hall flags, she ran out on the steps to
call Philip.  Lorry rushed in, made a swift but devastating journey
round the hall and into the parlour, and out again, saying plainly:
"Exactly what I said!"

Lady Dorothy Byng lived alone in the big old Tudor house at the
bottom of the lane.  Old Philip was her butler and house-steward, and
Bridget, his wife, was her maid.  She need not ask anyone's leave to
have Dick carried into her oak-panelled parlour, and laid on a settle
by the fire.  Lorry, it is true, remonstrated to the best of his
ability, but, failing to convince her, he lay down to watch
operations.  In his opinion, starving creatures should be restored
with chicken-bones, not bread-and-milk, but he could not convince
anyone of that either.

Dick opened his eyes in the strange room, and saw kind faces.

"Dream," he murmured, and shut them again.  In this condition he
drank milk until he was persuaded of its reality.  The comfort was
almost unbearable.  He turned his cheek on a soft cushion, and fell
asleep.

"Well, Philip," said Lady Dorothy next morning, "what think you of
our little waif?"

Dick had slept the night in Philip's room.

"Well, my Lady," the old butler replied, "'tis an ill-groomed colt,
to be truthful; but, begging your pardon, Bridget saith its skin is
as soft and fine as your Ladyship's; bruised, all of a mass, madam,
but white as milk now Bridget hath washed him.  And hair, Bridget
saith, like spun silk."

Lady Dorothy lifted her eyebrows.

"Upon my word, I must go up and see this prodigy, Philip.  Is it
asleep?"

"Not now, my Lady.  But I'll carry him down if it pleases you to see
him."

"No, no," she said, "I'll go up."

Dick was lying in a bed--a real bed.  The butler's couch was princely
after the straw of the inn-keeper's boy.  He had had as much food as
he wanted, and, instead of being cuffed away from the dish, had been
pressed to eat more.  He had been washed, and his cuts and bruises
doctored.  It was no dream--a reality.  He kept shutting his eyes and
opening them quickly.  Each time everything was there: the
white-washed wall, the latticed window, the bed, and himself--Dick.
It was during one of these experiments that the door opened softly,
and Lady Dorothy Byng came in.  Dick's lids lifted quickly, and his
gaze became fixed.  She wore a gown of soft white material, and in
the white lawn and lace at her bosom, caught in the folds, was a
daffodil flower.  Her fair hair was dressed in curls on her forehead
and neck, and her bare arms and hands were exquisitely beautiful.
She had been famous at a court where many women had been fair.  To
Dick she appeared the most beautiful creature ever created.  Her
brown eyes looked into Dick's gray ones with a gaze as fixed as his,
and more troubled.  For fully two minutes she stood still, and then,
with a little sigh, came close to the bed.

"Are you rested?" she asked gently.

"Yes, Lady, I thank you."

"Rest as long as you like, and eat as much as you can," she said;
"and when you are stronger, perhaps you will tell me whither you were
going, and how I can help you."

At the inn no one had spoken like this to Dick, and he was at a loss
how to answer.  In fancy he fell back to the modes of Giles's master,
and then, with more confidence, to Giles's own.  Recalling his slow,
gentle way of speaking, he said: "Your Ladyship is very good.  I
thank you."  But there he stopped, hesitated a moment, and then
dropped suddenly into the hurried tones and loose language of the
inn--a quite unintelligible jargon to Lady Dorothy's ears.  He tried
to explain how he came to be lying by the roadside, but she shook her
head.

"Never mind how you came there," she said.  "You were hungry, I take
it, and tired, and the side of the road was safer than the middle."

Dick remembered Giles had said something like that.  He smiled
faintly.  Could he do nothing to show her Ladyship he was grateful
before she sent him away?

"I shall not send you away, my child," she answered, smiling.  "You
will go when you want to."

"I shall never want to," said Dick, lifting his eyes to hers, full of
tears.

Lady Dorothy caught his face between her hands, and looked eagerly at
him.

"What is your name?" she enquired.

"Dick--" he began, and stopped sadly.

"What else?" she demanded.  But as he did not answer, she let him go.

"Very well," she said kindly.  "But if you choose to trust me, I come
of people used to be trusted with anything."

Dick hid his face in the pillow.  But he turned in a moment.

"Are you for the King, madam?"

"Of a certainty," she replied, as if she deemed the question
unnecessary--almost foolish.

Dick sighed.  She might have heard of him through father or brother,
or some Cavalier friend.

"And do I harbour a young rebel?" she asked.

"No--oh, no, madam!"

"That is well; for I might love my own enemies at a pinch, Dick, but
the King's--never!"

Dick sighed again.

"Do you know anyone who is with the King, madam?"

"Several gentlemen," she said, smiling.  "I might claim acquaintance
with many."

"If you knew who I was," stammered Dick, "you might not--you would
not--"

"If you have done anything false, do not tell me," she said.

"Nothing!" he cried.  "Oh, nothing, madam!  But I am hunted.  I
am--madam, my name is--"

"Have no fear," she said.  "If you have done no wrong, and are in
peril, you will be safe with me.  Tell me, Dick!  Tell me!"

Dick could no more withstand her, now she entreated, than he could
fly.

"My name is Chester, madam.  Sir Richard Chester of Dent.

"Yes, Dick," she said, kneeling down by the bed, and looking at him.

"Did you know all the time?" he asked, wondering.

"Yes, I think I did, dear," she said.

She kissed him, and then stood up.

"Go to sleep now, Dick," she whispered.  "And--and you must stay with
me for always, dear."

She left the room swiftly, and Dick lay back wondering.




CHAPTER XII

DICK'S COUSIN

Bridget waited on Dick all day, keeping him in bed, petting him, and
nursing him, and making much of him.  In the evening Philip came in
with a parcel in his arms.

"Now, sir," he said, "if you will be pleased to rise, here are your
clothes.  All the way to Arncastor have I been to fetch your honour a
wardrobe, by my Lady's orders.  And here you be."

Dick sat up and watched with interest as Philip laid out a complete
suit of gray cloth, very fine and elegant, shoes with large rosettes,
silk stockings, and a fine holland shirt with lace ruffles and collar.

"Those are not my clothes, sir," he said.

"By your good leave, sir, my Lady says they are.  I was cleaning my
plate, and humming a tune, as it might be, this morning, when in
comes my Lady, and saith she: 'Philip, the young gentleman upstairs
is my kinsman.'  'Yes, my Lady,' I say.  'He hath fallen amongst
unkind people, and lost his clothes, Philip,' saith my Lady.  'Yes,
my Lady,' I say.  'Ride you over to Arncastor, and purvey him all
manner of apparel,' saith my Lady.  And 'Yes, my Lady,' say I."

Dick got up and let Philip dress him without a word, and comb and
curl his hair.

"Moreover," the old man continued, as he wound a crimson sash with
fringed ends round Dick's waist; "moreover, my Lady fetches this
forth of her stores, and this fine lace also, and saith she: 'Dress
the young gentleman carefully, Philip, remembering he is my kinsman.'
And 'Yes, my Lady,' say I."

Between laughing and crying at all this comfort and kindness, Dick
was led downstairs to the oak-panelled room where Lady Dorothy Byng
was sitting.  She rose as he entered, and dropped him a curtsy.

"Welcome, little Cousin," she said.

Dick stood stock-still and stared at her.  There was a fire on the
hearth, for the spring evenings were cold, and she stood in the light
of it, wonderfully dressed in a pale-blue brocade, with hare-bells in
her hair.

"Come and speak to me, Dick."

She held out her hand.  Dick sprang across the floor, and flung
himself on his knees to kiss her hand and thank her.

"Little courtier," she said.  "Where did you learn such manners?"

"Ah, my Lady, how shall I ever thank you?"

She sat down and drew him towards her.  "Dick," she said, "did you
never hear that the Byngs and the Chesters were cousins?"

"No, madam!"

"Ah, but they are!  Lady Chester was Mistress Elizabeth Byng."

"I never heard of it, madam," said Dick.

"Will you not have me for a cousin, Dick?" she asked persuasively.

"Ay, that will I though!" he cried eagerly.  He would have said the
same had she proposed to be his grandmother.  He cared not a straw
how it might have come about.  It was enough for him that she desired
to be akin to him--poor, lonely little wretch.  Why, what a different
thing life might be, in this room, with such a cousin!

"Dick, will you tell me all about yourself some day?" she asked next.

"Now, madam--"

"Say 'Cousin Dorothy'," she said.

"Now, Cousin Dorothy.  You will not tell anyone?  You will never let
them take me away?"  He looked up wistfully.

"No one shall part you from me, Dick.  That I promise you," she said,
kissing him.  "You shall stay with me always if you care, Dick.  I
live here quite alone.  I doubt whether anyone in the world remembers
poor Dorothy Byng.  In all this long war, Dick, neither friend nor
foe has broken the quiet of our life here.  We have never seen so
much as a plume or a crop-head from the windows.  You will be safe
enough here, if you think you can bide in such a dull place."

She had won Dick's confidence as completely as Giles and his master
had done.  Sitting there at her knee, he told her his story as well
as he could.  Some of the incidents puzzled her, explain them how he
would, stumbling amongst the current language of the Seven Thorns.
On that, and on many other occasions, she made him tell his tale
again and again.  There were parts of it quite beyond her credence.
For one thing, she would not believe the Cavaliers wanted Dick for
punishment, or that the two who came to the inn were on the look-out
for him, or remembered, or recognized him.  She tried to reason away
his fear of detection, for she saw it weighed on his mind.

"When you're stronger, Dick, you'll forget all about it.  Someone has
deceived you about the proclamation.  You misunderstood the officers
at the inn."

"But there was the one on the road," Dick reminded her.  "The one
sent to bring me back."

"We don't understand the whole matter, 'tis plain, Dick," she said
thoughtfully.  "And the only way to make it all clear is to enquire
amongst His Majesty's forces."

But this suggestion almost threw Dick into a frenzy of terror.

"No, no, I beseech you, madam!" he cried.  "They will come and seize
me!  Oh, please, let it be!"

"But I want you set right, Dick."

"Oh, no!" he persisted.  "I would rather--far, far rather not.  Ah,
madam, to be taken back before all those fine gentleman and disgraced
as a liar!"

"But you are not a liar."

"No; but how prove it?" he said piteously.  "They do so confuse a
person.  They talk with two meanings, and one can't tell which to
answer.  Whatever you say they laugh, and make it sound different.
Dear Lady Dorothy, keep me from them!"

"Well," she said, "we'll say no more about it at present.  But, my
child, 'tis months since your adventure at Lumley.  Think you any of
those teasing gentlemen would remember your face if they saw you?"

But Dick could not be argued out of his terror.  The sight of a
Cavalier would almost have killed him with apprehension.

"Had you dealt direct with the King, Dick, you would stand in danger
of recognition if he met you.  He never forgets a face, once seen, be
it peer's or pauper's."

"I didn't see the King," said Dick.  He begged her ladyship so
earnestly not to stir in the matter, and to keep his very name from
everyone, that at length she consented.  She would not wholly
sympathize with his fears, however, and tried, sometimes by coaxing
and sometimes by laughing, to persuade him out of them.  But Dick's
chief sorrow was that he could not interest her in Giles.  Lady
Dorothy dismissed the mention of him with a little gesture of
disgust.  A stable-helper, tramping the road in tatters, taking the
first job that came, was distinctly disagreeable to her.

"Tell me all the rest as often as you will, Dick," she would say,
laughing.  "But, if you love me, spare me Giles."

Dick felt this state of mind difficult to understand, but after much
arguing, and some tears, he gave the subject up in despair.  He
supposed it was because she was a great lady, and great ladies, be
they never so charming, must have their foibles.  To a great lord,
now, like Giles's master, what an acceptable subject was dear Giles!
The veto placed on Giles's praises prevented Dick from telling his
story very well.  She seemed to find very unsatisfactory points in
it.  For instance, why had not Giles honestly given Dick his master's
name?  Why all that mystery with the token, pray?  And what was the
token--a coin?  But Dick declared he had not noticed it much.  He did
not think it was a coin.  It had not a crowned head on.  Giles's
master had not given it back to him.  Then she asked if Dick could
not describe Giles's master.  Dick's description, though it seemed to
him truthful, was not convincing, the most lucid facts being that he
had worn a black velvet suit, and did not look like a soldier.  But
he had said before that Giles had told him that his master was a
soldier, and her Ladyship shook her head doubtfully.  And if Giles
was not at Dent when it was seen by the relief-party, where was he?
Dead, Dick supposed.  She did not seem to think so.  She was sure the
boy was telling the truth as far as he knew it, but she was certain
he had in some way been grossly deceived.  Poor, simple country boy,
he had been sacrificed to someone's private ends, she thought.  For
the Royalist proclamation she had nothing but contempt.

"Dick," she said one day, "I believe your cousin John Dent's at the
bottom of this trouble."

"Oh, how, Cousin Dorothy?" he asked with surprise.

"Why, I believe he had you stolen from Lumley, and set Master Purvis
to take you to the Seven Thorns.  For, you see, he would be the next
baronet were you lost for ever."

Dick pondered this proposition for some time, but could not accept
it.  He firmly believed Master Purvis had saved him from the
Provost-Marshal--the Provost-Marshal with whose justice the gentleman
at Lumley had threatened him if they failed to find Giles.  Master
Purvis might have chosen a better home for him.  But perhaps that
cruel man, Newton, had taken him to friends of his own to save
trouble.  He had evidently been well known to the Tomlinsons.  He
could not connect Captain Dent with the business in any way.  He did
not think he had been at Lumley, and Master Purvis had never
mentioned his name.

"You have no other brothers, Dick?" asked her Ladyship.  "I
mean--John Dent is your heir?"

"Yes," said Dick, "he is my heir."

"Then you have no other brothers, Dick?" she persisted.

"I never had either brother or sister of my own, madam."

"Not of your own?" she repeated.

"No.  I had a step-brother.  He died--oh, it will be six years ago
now!--in France."

"Do you remember him?" she asked, looking into the fire.

"No, Cousin Dorothy.  I never saw him."

"How was that, Dick?"

"Master Purvis said he quarrelled with my father.  I don't know.  I
never heard.  He never came to Dent--never after I was born, I'm
sure."

"Oh!" she said.




CHAPTER XIII

LADY DOROTHY'S STORY

Lorry expressed grave doubts of Dick's character for several days,
though, as her Ladyship told him, he had no grounds for his
suspicions at all.  He was merely jealous.  That a strange creature
should occupy the bear-skin at her feet, and that his mistress should
pat the boy's head as often as Lorry's, was an offence to him.  In
vain her Ladyship introduced Dick to him as one of the family,
"Master Richard Byng", as he was called now, since he would not be
known as Richard Chester.  Lorry would have none of him.  But one day
he quite suddenly changed his mind.  They were walking in the garden,
and Lady Dorothy asked the boy to fetch her scarf.  Dick darted off
up the terrace to the house, and Lorry, with a joyous yelp, dashed
after.  Here, he thought, was one who would sympathize with his own
wild moods.  Here was this boy, who could run fast, faster than Lady
Dorothy; who could leap and bound, which Lady Dorothy never did.  He
could scream with laughter, also, in emulation of Lorry's barks, and
he did not mind having his face licked, and had no skirts to crush.
Henceforth, in the interests of fun and exercise, he cultivated Dick.
Together they risked their lives in a thousand monkey-tricks,
climbing and fishing and falling.  Dick learned to know the fields
and woods for miles round in Lorry's company; but they never went
quite to the top of the twisted lane and out on the highroad, for
there, as Dick told Lorry, they might meet with a Cavalier.  He
fished and bathed in the streams.  He rode on the fat pony, Fairy, by
her Ladyship's side.  Old Philip taught him to fence, and to shoot
with a pistol, and many other manly accomplishments good for health
and bad for clothes.  On Sundays her Ladyship read the Litany and the
prayers for the King, in the dining-room, for no clergyman could be
found to come and read the service in her chapel just then.  On wet
days she read aloud to Dick out of books of romance and travel and
poetry, whilst he and Lorry shared the bear-skin or the window-seat.
She played the lute also, and she taught Dick to sing with her,
whilst Lorry whined outside, not liking their melody.  She told him
delightful tales, too, about living men and women.  Very much the
same kind of tales as Giles had told him, Dick thought, though he
dare not say so, since she would not love Giles.  He grew
well-mannered under her care, affectionate and gentle, carried
himself like a young gentleman, losing in time the hunted look and
shrinking air of the innkeeper's half-starved boy.  He was very
happy, and in a month or two became very merry.  He loved his cousin
with all his heart, and hoped for nothing but to live with her all
his life, and please her if he could.  The old house was a lively
place in those early summer months.  Dick and Lorry were up at dawn,
and filled it with noise and laughter till the night.  Sometimes, it
is true, Dick was very sad.  Something would remind him of Giles, and
he would burst into tears and run away to hide himself until the fit
was over.  One day Lorry crept after him softly, found him out, and
lay down by him, his tail slowly thumping the ground, and his great
eyes quite as full of grief as Dick's.  Dick flung his arms round the
dog's neck.

"You seem to know how bad it feels," he sobbed.  "How do you know,
old fellow?"

Lorry gave a little whimper, as though he would have him believe he
had lost scores of dear friends himself.  Then he tried to lick Dick
all over at once.

"She is good, Lorry, yet she doesn't know.  She won't hear me say how
I loved Giles--my dear, dear Giles!"

Lorry whined sympathetically.

"Perhaps she never missed anyone," continued Dick, rubbing his eyes
and crying bitterly.

"Yes, she did, Dick.  Yes, she does," said Lady Dorothy's voice quite
near him.

She had caught sight of him crouching under the hedge at the end of
the garden, and he saw she was weeping too.  She sat down by him, and
drew him to her.  Dick laid his head on her knee, and Lorry laid his
on her dress.

"Tell me," said Dick.

"Well, Dick, I will tell you," she said, "because it has something to
do with you.  You must know that I once had a brother, Dick, a year
younger than myself.  He was very dear to me, and when I went to
court, our father got him a post there also.  And it was there, Dick,
that he and I both met again your step-brother, whom we'd known when
we were children."

Dick dried his eyes, and looked up.

"I was sixteen, Dick, only sixteen, but I had more than sixteen
suitors.  Of these I, outwardly at least, favoured most John Dent."

"John Dent!" exclaimed Dick.

"John Dent," she repeated.  "In those days John Dent, 'twas expected,
would soon be a great lord, and he was handsome and rich--very rich.
My father and brother wished me to marry him."

"You couldn't!" cried Dick, sitting up.  "He's a bad man, and cruel.
Oh, Cousin Dorothy, how dare they think of marrying you to him?"

"Well, Dick, perhaps he was not so bad in those days.  He had done
many things--gallant, hazardous things--such as you read of in
tale-books.  He was by way of being a hero, and he loved me, I think.
But--"

"But you didn't love him," said Dick, with strong confidence in her
judgment.

"No; but I was very young, and very easily flattered.  And Reginald,
your brother, whom I'd known so long--well, for one thing, he did not
ask me to marry him, and he was poor, compared with John Dent, and I
loved riches.  And he had done nothing, and I thought I loved a hero.
He only hung about the court, and was gay and a spendthrift, and my
father did not like him, nor my brother.  And one day, Dick, someone
told me my brother, Lord Byng, had insulted Reginald Chester.  And
the next day, when I was sitting at work in my room in my father's
house in London, the door flew open, and Philip rushed in.  'My Lady,
my Lady!' he cried, 'they are murdering your brother!'  I ran down
into the hall, and there stood Reginald Chester, his sword in his
hand, and at his feet, quite dead, my poor young brother.  Ah, Dick!
I accused Reginald, in my anger and grief, of killing Byng.  He was
such a child, I told him, he should have considered his years and
scorned to take offence at his sayings.  He had sworn to me once
always to be patient with Byng.  And I called him a liar, then, and a
coward to fight such a boy, and I--Oh, I know not what I
said--everything cruel!  Last of all, I drew from my bosom and flung
at his feet a boyish gift he'd given me, the only thing he'd ever
given me, when we were children.  He had said then 'twas a pledge of
his love for me.  He picked it up in silence, threw down his sword,
and said one thing, very bitter and terrible.  I bent over my
brother.  I never heard him go, Dick; and I have never seen him
since."

"He's dead now," said Dick, looking gravely before him; "but if he
did that, I'll never forgive him!  Never!"

She laid her hand over his lips.

"He did not do it, Dickie.  I would not have told you about him if
so."

"Who, then?"

"John Dent; quite accidentally, not deliberately.  Byng and Reginald
had made friends, and John Dent, annoyed by it, taunted my brother
with fearing Reginald's sword.  Byng sprang at him in anger.  In
self-defence John threw him back.  He fell with his head against a
stone table, and was killed so, Dickie.  There was no other wound on
him.  It was just so."

"And my brother?" Dick said.

"He went abroad--far away.  We none of us saw him any more."

"Did people think he had done it?  Was that why he went away?"

"Oh, no, Dick!  A gentleman who was with them saw the whole thing,
and told us.  Your brother had drawn on John Dent, to avenge Byng.
John Dent had but just hurried out of the hall when I came down the
stairs thither."

"Why did he go away, then?"

Lady Dorothy looked away across the garden to the sky.

"I sent him away, Dick," she said.

Dick gathered that Reginald had gone away because of the things Lady
Dorothy had said to him in the hall.  After a long silence, he said
gently: "And then you were sorry?"

"Then and ever since," she replied.

"And he never came back?"

"Never.  He would not, you know."

They were silent again.  Lorry, feeling it was all very dismal, gave
a little whine.

"And so," Lady Dorothy said at last, "I made a mistake, Dick.  When
my father died soon after Byng, I left the court, and bought this old
house in this desolate country, and came here out of the world."

"Well, I'm glad you didn't marry John Dent, Cousin Dorothy," said
Dick, with a great sigh.

"One mistake was enough, Dick."

"And is that why--why you were so good to me, Cousin Dorothy?"

"That is why I loved you immediately, Dick.  It was because of your
eyes, Dick--real Chester eyes.  I knew you before you told me, dear.
And you will always stay with me, and be my brother, Dick, will you
not?"

A little while later she said: "But I came meaning to cheer you, not
make you sadder."

"I'm happier," said Dick.

"But listen.  I have a birthday, sir, week after next, and I have a
mind to be gay."

Lorry wagged his tail as if he understood something more cheerful was
coming up for discussion.

"Now, what shall we do on the day, Dick?"

Dick thought solemnly for a few moments.

"I have it!" he cried.  "We'll ride out early, and take with us our
breakfast and our dinner."

"Ah!" said her ladyship.  "And eat them both at once.  And then what,
sir?"

"No, no!" cried the boy eagerly.  "Ride a long way first, Cousin
Dorothy, then breakfast.  Then on again to the ruined abbey you told
me of in the woods."

"Then dinner?" she suggested.

"Then dinner!" cried Dick.  "And you will tell me stories about the
monks, and the knights who used to ride about adventuring.  Then ride
home in the evening.  A lovely day, Cousin Dorothy! a lovely day!"

"Agreed," she said.  "But what next?  There will be some hours left
over, Dick.  There will be--"

"There will be supper!" cried Dick, as one inspired.  "Supper, Cousin
Dorothy, with roasted ducks, green peas, and strawberries, Cousin
Dorothy!  And cream!"

Lorry lifted his head and barked for joy.

"Ducks' bones, Lorry," said Dick, poking him in the ribs.  "And
skin--nice brown skin.  Ah! so rich, and bad for dogs."

"We'll have a perfect banquet, Dickie," said her Ladyship, rising to
the occasion, and enjoying his delight.  "You shall be toast-master
for the night, and call my health, after His Majesty's.  And you may
wish me a long and happy life; for I dare look forward to one now
with my dear little brother Dick.  And I'll wear white satin and
pearls, sir.  And you, what will you wear?"

"My best suit--the gray, Cousin.  'Tis as good as new."

"Well enough for most days, Dick; not festive enough for this.  'Tis
to be a new life for me, Dick--less selfish, much brighter.  You must
wear something new, for luck, and to remind you to wish me happiness,
you know."

"Then I'd best wear the rags I came in," cried Dick impulsively.
"Remind me to wish you well, Cousin Dorothy?  They'd remind me, did I
ever forget for a second of the day."

"Why, Dickie," she said, kissing him, "you know how to say a good
thing well.  But, my dear, they would not suit my satin and pearls."

"The gray, then.  I care not two straws, so I'm with you."

"Don't make rash assertions, sir.  You'll be a coxcomb some day."

They were going indoors, when she stayed him.

"I have it, as you say, Dick.  We'll ride into Arncastor to-morrow
and have your worship measured for a suit.  The court comes to
Arncastor, Philip tells me.  The King meets the Queen there
to-morrow.  There will be the newest modes and tailors in plenty,"
she went on, not heeding the boy's uneasiness.  "You shall see what
gay gentlemen wear."

"Oh, no, no!" Dick entreated.

"No, no!  Why no?" she asked.

"I dare not!  I dare not!" he cried.  "Someone would see me, and drag
me away."

"Oh, still that old fancy, Dick?" she said, with a touch of
displeasure.  "Methought you'd outgrown it.  And pray, who would
touch the cousin of Lady Dorothy Byng?"

"I dare not, madam."

"Then you're a little coward."

Dick's face turned very white.  He bent his head unconsciously.  "As
you please, madam," he said, "I will go then."

He walked away, but, calling his name, she stepped swiftly after him.
Unheeding, injured, and proud, he went on.

"Come back!  Come back and forgive me, Dick!"

He wavered; remembered her story; remembered her goodness, and turned.

"Forgive me, Dick!" she entreated.  "I had no right to say it."

"Never mind," he said, swallowing down his anger.  "I am a coward.  I
will go with you anywhere."

"That you shall not," said her Ladyship.  "Indeed, I had forgotten
about--about it, Dick.  Kiss me.  There! we are friends again!
Philip shall fetch a tailor over here to measure you.  What?  Clear
your face and forgive me."

"But you think me a coward?" he said.

"No.  You will get over it in time, Dick.  'Tis because you are not
very strong yet.  But there; I will not torture you, dear.  Come, let
us think of the suit, Dick.  Of a rose-coloured silk, I picture it.
Rose suits your dark man, let me tell you.  Quite simple.  Just
slashed to let your honour's white holland show through.  And I have
a Mechlin collar that I'll bestow on you, Dick, with a jewel to loop
up your hat."

Dick found the subject alluring after all, though he professed to
scorn dress as unmanly.  But even whilst he talked of the birthday a
dead weight lay at the bottom of his heart.  She had called him, and
she thought him, a coward.




CHAPTER XIV

THE COMING OF JOHN DENT

It was the night before her Ladyship's birthday, and she and Dick
were sitting in the oak parlour after supper, discussing the chances
of a fine day on the morrow.  Dick was in a state of excitement, for
he had just been on a visit to the larder, and had seen the rows of
cold fowls, and creams, and custards prepared by her Ladyship's cook.
He was agitating Lorry's mind with whispered promises of good things
for to-morrow, when they all heard the sound of horses in the yard,
then men's voices at the door and in the hall.  Lady Dorothy drew
back the shutter to look out, but Dick ran into the hall to see, and
came back in a second with a startled air.

"Cousin Dorothy!  Two officers--rebels--and their troops!"

Old Philip here came into the parlour.

"Madam," he gasped, "'tis some of the enemy.  They want a night's
lodging and supper, and won't be denied."

"Why were they admitted?" her Ladyship asked.

"Madam, the door was open.  They were in ere I knew."

At the moment Philip was pushed aside, and one of the intruders
entered the room.  "Madam," he said, "we have lost our way.  If you
are mistress here, give orders for food to be served us, and beds for
us after, and we will give you no trouble."

"I have neither food nor beds for rebels, sir," she said
indifferently, scarcely looking at him.

"Then, madam, I must take what you will not give me, and place your
household under arrest."

"You must do what you please, sir.  'Tis easy to overcome a few women
and one weak old man."

The officer gave her a long, hard look, which she met with coolness,
and then he went out, pushing Philip before him.

"Dick," said her Ladyship, "that was--"

"John Dent!" cried the boy.

"Think you he recognized you, Dickie?"

"I think he scarcely looked at me, Cousin Dorothy.  He knew you."

Her Ladyship began to pace up and down.

"There seems to be nothing for us to do," she said presently.  "We
will go to our rooms and lock ourselves in, and wait till they're
gone.  Do you think they will rob me of everything--burn, pillage,
and destroy?"

Dick went to the door, opened it, and shut it again quickly.

"There are two troopers outside, Cousin," he whispered excitedly.

"Guards posted!  Imprisoned in my own parlour!  Upon my word, Dick,
'tis insufferable."

She sat down to think out the situation.  But very soon the door was
flung open, and John Dent came in again.  She stood up.

"Madam," he said, "if you will retire, I shall be obliged to you.  We
shall leave at daybreak, and since you have not given us hospitality,
we need not wake your Ladyship to say 'thank you'."

"Come, Dick," she said, without noticing the speaker.

"Dick will remain with me.  My friend and I have a few questions to
ask him.  Dick, I may tell you, is my cousin."

Another officer entered, and bowed awkwardly to the lady.  John Dent
held the door open.

"You may leave us, madam," he said.

Dick knew well the hard look on John Dent's face.

"Cousin Dorothy," he said quickly, "if you will go, I will soon
answer these gentlemen's questions."

"I will not trust you alone with them, my dear," she said.

"As you please," said John Dent, with a slight smile, seating
himself.  "Now, Richard, speak the truth, and don't lie to us as you
did to the Royalists at Lumley.  Who was with you at Dent?"

"Giles," answered the boy.  "The stableman you helped on the road,
and who knew you were a traitor."

"Who else?"

"No one."

"I warned you, boy," said John Dent.  "We are no more to be imposed
on than the King's people.  Who else?"

"No one," said Dick.

"You hear, Captain Strong?" said Dent to the other officer.

"'Tis a lie," said the other.  "We should not have sat outside Dent
fearing to attack a child and a groom.  'Twas a gentleman spoke to me
and to our general, though he masqueraded in your stableman's rags.
They would not have held Dent without a garrison--don't you tell me.
Go to!"

"You see, Richard?  Captain Strong was at Dent.  He knows what he
speaks of."

"Ay!" cried the captain.  "Why they made a sortie and carried in a
trooper.  Think you, with the drawbridge down, they'd have left the
place in charge of a child?"

"No doubt one of their leaders masqueraded in Giles's rags.  Now,
sir! once again, who?" asked Dent.

"There was no one but Giles and me," said Dick stoutly.

"Richard, I warn you once more to tell the truth."

"I am telling it.  There was only Giles and me."

"A lie!  A lie!" Strong affirmed angrily.  "'Twould be to our lasting
disgrace if a stable-helper and a baby kept us out of Dent.  Or
'twill be to yours, Colonel Dent.  For we went thither by your
arrangement."

He cast a curious glance at his companion.  Suspicion will attach to
the man who leaves one party for another, be he never so zealous.

"It is to your lasting disgrace, then," said Dick hotly.  "'Tis you
that are lying."

"Were you a few years older you should hang, sir, if it's the truth!"
growled Strong.

John Dent looked across at her ladyship and saw her move uneasily.

"As it is," Strong continued, "you shall be flogged.  I swear you
shall--whether it's truth or lie."

"You will not lay a finger on my cousin, sir," said her ladyship
haughtily.  "And you, sir, who command here--"

"My name is Dent, madam."

"Oh, I have no concern with your name, sir!"

"Your Ladyship once listened when I offered to bestow it upon you."

"I thank God I escaped the disgrace, sir!" she replied.

"I must beg you to be silent, madam," he said, flushing, "or I must
compel you to leave the room.  I was about to ask Captain Strong why
age should be a bar.  If Richard Chester is old enough, or thinks
himself old enough, to hold a castle, and flout a general, he is old
enough to die."

Lady Dorothy could contain herself no longer.

"A truce, sir, to such mummery!" she cried.  "Do you think to scare
Dick into a falsehood by such a threat?"

"Oh no, madam!" he replied.  "I don't wish to frighten anyone.  If
Dick prefers it, I am quite willing to send him to his friends.  They
are all at Arncastor.  He will know whether they are prepared, and
how prepared, to receive him."

"Not that!" Dick cried.  "Not that!"

"Ah!" said Dent to the other officer, "a pretty conclusive proof his
story is a lie, Strong."

"Oh, if he admits 'tis a lie, and that there were men and a commander
at Dent, I've no more against him," Strong said.  "The rumour that
one man and a boy kept us out must be stopped.  And methinks 'tis to
your interest also that men shouldn't say your paid servant kept us
out where you'd lured us to enter."

"Tell the truth, Dick," said Dent fiercely.  "Or to-morrow I send you
to Arncastor.  They will cut the truth out of you there, whilst the
Cavaliers look on."

Dick turned white, but he said nothing.

"Say 'twas a gentleman at Dent.  That you had a garrison--that's
all," Dent urged.

The boy was silent.

"Very good," said Dent rising.  "Corporal!"

A soldier entered saluting.

"Take charge of this boy, Richard Chester, and conduct him to
Arncastor to-morrow."

Dick sprang towards him, clutched his arm, and cried: "Kill me here!
Kill me here!  I can't bear that!"

Lady Dorothy swept forward, and drawing Dick to her, she folded her
beautiful arms about him.

"John Dent!" she said in a low voice, but very clear and cutting.
"You coward!  How will you answer to your God for this offence?  You
know 'tis a fabric of lies about our people desiring his
punishment--a fabric of lies, and you reared it.  Stand back, sir!"

"Take care, madam!" he said angrily.

"Ah!" she said scornfully.  "I do not fear a coward!"

"Then you shall confess me a brave man, for you shall fear me!  He
shall die!"

"You have no power to do it," she said, but Dick felt her tremble
under Dent's glance.

"He has borne arms.  He was Captain of Dent.  Scotch your snake when
he's small, madam.  He dies at sun-up."

"Sir," said her ladyship in an altered tone, "if I plead with you--"

"'Tis likely mere pleading will be heard after your insults!
Richard, step out, sir!  If you hide in her Ladyship's skirts any
longer, my men shall drag her away."

Dick kissed her hands swiftly, tore them away, and stood out alone.

"Take him away, Corporal," Dent commanded.

"May I go to my own room?" Dick asked.  "I've been very happy there.
It has a high window.  I couldn't escape."  He was addressing Captain
Strong, who sat back in his chair, with a slightly, puzzled
expression.

"Let him have his way," he said hastily to the corporal.  "And
Dent--I say, Dent, have not we very suddenly jumped to this
conclusion?  He is but a child!"

"Away!" cried Dent to the corporal.  "What, Strong?  Nay, thus I kill
rumours.  Now, madam, will it please you to leave us, or must I send
for a guard for you, also?"

Lady Dorothy turned to Strong.

"Sir," she said, "you will not suffer this?  You will exercise your
power--"

"Strong has none," said Dent brutally.  "If he moves in this matter,
he reckons with me."

Strong fidgeted, and looked uneasily at the lady.

"I'm rich, sirs," said her ladyship desperately.  "Captain Strong, if
you will aid me--"

"He daren't take a bribe," Dent interrupted.

"And you, sir?" she asked.  "For what will you sell me the life of
this child?"

"There is one bribe I will take--only one,--you may offer it," Dent
replied slowly, looking at her.

Very hurriedly she left the room.




CHAPTER XV

DICK MEETS DEATH

The first thing Dick saw, when the sun rose, was the new suit of
rose-coloured silk which her Ladyship had given him to wear on her
birthday.  Old Philip had laid it out on the oak chest when it came
from Arncastor the afternoon before.  This was her birthday, to which
they had so looked forward.  He sat up in the bed and looked at the
sun.

"I'm going to die," he said aloud.

It was quite unbelievable.  There was the world outside, and here was
his room and the birthday suit, and himself well and strong, and as
much in need of breakfast as usual.  He had not meant to go to sleep
last night, but without undressing had lain down to think.  Sleep had
come, however, and here was the sun, and at sunrise they had said he
should die.  He started up.  In a mirror opposite he saw a tumbled
suit, an untidy head, and a pair of large frightened eyes.

"This won't do," he thought miserably.  "I look like a traitor.  I
die game, like the men in the tale-books."

He stripped, plunged into a basin of cold water, got out a clean
shirt, paused; cried a little, and dried the tears with his
wrist-bands; then drew on the new silken hose, and put on the shoes
with rosettes.  Then came the rose-coloured suit, and with trembling
hands he fastened the collar of rich lace her Ladyship had given him,
and tied the embroidered sash.

"'Tis her birthday," he thought.  "God bless her and give her many,
many happy years, dear Cousin Dorothy!  I wish I'd died at the inn
before I knew what happiness felt like."

He buried his face in the pillows and cried bitterly.  But he heard
steps outside, and pulled himself up.  The corporal came in.

"Are you ready?" he asked.

"I haven't said my prayers yet," said Dick.

"Say them then, in good season."

Dick said the Lord's Prayer, and then, putting on his hat, said: "I'm
ready."

"I'm not afraid to die," he observed as they went downstairs, "but
I'm sorry past bearing to leave Cousin Dorothy."

The corporal said: "Umph!"

In the hall Captain Strong bade them halt.  The door was open, and
Dick saw two troopers under a tree on the grass, and hanging from a
branch of the tree was a rope.  He started.  He had thought they
would shoot him at least.  A rope!  A halter!  Die on a gallows!  He
flushed.  And for what?  A lie would have saved him, and his death
was of no importance.  He was not saving anyone, or serving anyone,
by his death.

"God knows, Dick," Giles had said at Dent, "you may die disgraced on
a gallows, for that.  But, my dear fellow, it's the duty that counts."

Dick bit his lip.  If Giles were only here!

Just then, between Dick and the tree, came the black form of Lorry,
with a tense, disapproving lift of the tail.  He saw Dick waiting for
a game, he supposed, gave a yelp of greeting, and came bounding up
the path and into the hall.  Dick caught him in his arms.  Then,
turning to the corporal savagely, he said: "Why don't you get on, you
cowards?  I can't stand much more."

The parlour door opened as he spoke, and the Lady Dorothy came out,
followed by John Dent.  She was very pale, but quite composed, and
she wore the same dress as upon the last evening, and the flowers in
her hair, Dick noticed vaguely, were dead.  She came straight up to
him and kissed him.

"You are free, Richard," said John Dent.  "To horse, every man!"  He
was pale too, and curiously subdued in his manner.  "She pleaded for
you, Richard," he said.  "Farewell, madam!"

Her Ladyship turned and swept him a curtsy, but she neither spoke nor
lifted her eyes to him.  He bowed.  Then she led Dick away to her
room.

"Oh, Cousin!" he cried.  "Dear Cousin! is it true?  Have they gone?
Am I safe?"

"All true, Dick.  Quite safe," she whispered.

He kissed her, kneeling by her, tried to thank her, and cried from
excitement and relief.

"And 'tis still your birthday, dear!  It seems weeks since sunrise.
But, after all, we are going to have a merry day!"

She caressed him.

"We may, Cousin Dorothy, after all," he ran on.  "Thanks to you,
dearest, best of cousins!  I'll never call John Dent my cousin--never
any more!  But you are weary.  You haven't slept.  Not been to bed
all night?  And I--I slept like a log.  We will not ride out, then.
We'll bide at home.  Ods me!  I'm hungry--something dreadful!"

"Go and breakfast, Dick," she said, "and I'll come anon."

"Shall I send Bridget with the chocolate and come and have it with
you?"

"Nay," she answered.  "You will want much more than she can carry.
I'll call her by and by.  You run, quick, Dick.  Here comes Lorry,
scratching.  Be off the two of you!"

She fairly turned them out of her room and shut the door.

Bridget came to Dick later, and said her ladyship was resting, and
would he hold her excused till the evening banquet, when she would
come down right gaily.

Dick cheerfully agreed, for had she not been up all night on his
behalf?  He sent her his love, by Bridget, and bade her say he was
busy composing an oration for the evening feast.  Then he went to
enquire of the maids what depredations the Puritans had made; but
finding they had confined themselves to beef and beer, he went off
with Lorry to visit the gardens and the stables.

"I've come back to life, Lorry," he told his friend.  "Hours since I
should have been cold and dead, sir, but for her.  Eh, Lorry, dear,
if she should some day need helping, I'd face anything for her!"

The rope was gone from the tree on the lawn, but Dick ran past it
with a shudder.  It was good to be alive, and how near he had been to
death!

That evening the table was spread in the dining-room, with more
candles to light it than usual.  There were great bowls of roses, and
strawberries in silver dishes, with creams and jellies enough for
three times the number of guests.  Lady Dorothy Byng wore her white
satin and pearls, and a cluster of damask roses in her hair.  She was
more gay and more beautiful, Dick thought, than he had ever seen her
before.  At the end of the feast Dick stood up and cried lustily:
"His Majesty the King!  God bless him!"

Her Ladyship rose and curtsied, and they drank the health together.
Her Ladyship leaned back in her chair, but Dick remained standing,
and Philip refilled the glass.  He turned the glass in his fingers.

"I'd made a lovely speech, Cousin," he said, and the lights seemed
curiously dim, "but I--I can't remember a word.  I'd die for you,
though, and I love you, and I wish you very many happy years and a
long--"

"Not that, Dick," she said, lifting her hand.  "I don't think I'll
care for a long life.  But I like the rest very much, Dick.  Thank
you.  Philip, you may go."

Dick's eyes saw things more plainly now.  He looked at her steadily.

"What have I said to make you weep?" he asked.

"Nothing.  Come here, dear.  There!  I think I'm tired again, Dickie."

Dick kissed her.

"You go and rest, Cousin," he said cheerfully.  "All these candles
make one's head ache this hot night."

"Yes, Dick, but I want you first to add one clause to your dear
little speech."

"What?" he said.

"I want you to say, instead of dying, that you'll live with me
always.  That you'll never leave me for a day."

"Add that!" he cried.  "Did I need to?  You know I never will."

"Say it, though, Dickie.  'Whatever happens' say."

Dick said it and drank the toast, and his cousin left him with a
good-night kiss.




CHAPTER XVI

HER LADYSHIP'S PROMISE

Dick was in bed and half-asleep when old Philip tapped at his door
and came in.

"Are you asleep, master?" he said softly.

Dick sat up.

"What's the matter, Philip?" he asked.

"Eh, eh, sir, matter enough," the old man muttered.  "Her Ladyship
sent me to you."

"Is her Ladyship abed, Philip?  Is she resting?"

"Nay, there'll be no rest for her to-night, master."  The old man sat
down by the bedside as he spoke.  "She was for not having you told,"
he went on slowly, "but Bridget overruled her, and I upheld my wife.
'Tis only fitting you should hear.  You must know there was a price
paid for your life this morning, Master Richard."

"What for?  What price?" asked Dick.

"Her Ladyship gave her word to marry that black coward and traitor,
Mr. John Dent."

Dick started up, gasping.

"John Dent!  Promised to marry John Dent?"

"Ay, on condition he did not hang thee."

Dick fell back, shaking nervously.

"I'd better--" he began, "I'd rather have hanged than that."

"Well, there it is, sir," old Philip observed, "and no way, so far's
I can see, out of the hole.  They didn't ask you and they didn't ask
me, and I'd have killed John Dent myself sooner, and hanged for it
after."

"John Dent!" Dick cried again.  "For my sake!"

"Her Ladyship saith, if you must know, you must, and I must come and
tell you.  She fears how you may take it.  But she saith also she
trusts the promise you made her, that whatever happens you will never
leave her."

"Never!" Dick exclaimed.  He was thinking of John Dent--the dark,
harsh face, the cruel tongue, the heavy hand.  Always to live with
that! to be at that man's mercy!  "Philip!" he cried, "cannot we stop
it?  Hath my lady no friends?"

"He comes the day after to-morrow at noon," answered Philip, shaking
his head.  "He brings a parson.  My Lady stipulated for a churchman
to marry them here at once in the chapel.  She cannot stir.  She hath
given her promise.  Her people--her family--are all away in the
north, what's left of them.  There's no time to run to and fro
seeking their help."

"But, Philip, she must have friends nearer.  The court is at
Arncastor.  My Lady was at court.  There must be someone there would
help."

"'Tis many years since my Lady was at court," said old Philip
shrewdly.  "They have short memories at courts, sir.  No one there
will recollect her; new names come up right fast."

"But there would be someone there who'd take up the matter," Dick
urged, "if only to catch the traitor John Dent.  There would be some
gentlemen would ride out and help."

"Your ideas of gentlemen, sir--begging your pardon,--are got out of
my Lady's romance-books.  The live kind is different.  They'd ride
out to help, I grant you; but I know your court sparks!  They'd want
a reward.  We'd be as likely out of the frying-pan into the fire as
not, master."

Dick thought if his friend Giles were alive, and had power, he would
come to aid her Ladyship without wanting anything from her in reward.
Then he remembered Giles's master.  He had seemed powerful enough.
But he did not even know the name of Giles's master.  He sighed.

"Can you do nothing, Philip?"

"Me, sir?  No!  Her Ladyship gave a promise that none of her servants
should quit the place till--till it's done."

Dick stared dismally before him.

"But you are not one of her Ladyship's servants, master," said Philip
after a pause.

"Well?" said Dick.

"Well," the old man echoed, "if you have any friends at Arncastor, or
know of anyone that would help you--leaving her Ladyship out of the
question,--for anyone's sake, sir, now is the time to seek them up."

"I haven't a friend in the world," said Dick bitterly; "not one."

"You might have left the house, you see.  You might have gone to
Arncastor," said Philip.

"I?" Dick cried in horror.  "I go to Arncastor?  Why, Philip, I
should be seized the minute I got there.  They would not listen to
me.  They wouldn't believe a word I said.  Ah, you don't know!"

"'Tis only what her Ladyship hath told us that I know, sir," said
Philip.  "That you were her cousin; that you had fallen amongst folks
that ill-treated you; and that you had found her out and come hither.
That is all, sir.  But I thought that you might have other friends,
and you were sure to wish to serve her."

Dick said nothing.  He was still thinking of life with John Dent.
Would he let Dick stay with them?  After the wedding, even if he had
made her any promise about it, would he not try to get rid of Dick?
Think of being always in the power of John Dent!  In trying to avoid
it he would run risk of danger, of failure, of disgrace, and also the
loss of her faith in him.

Philip took up his candle and left the room with a husky "Good-night,
master", which Dick did not heed.  He buried his face in the pillows.
Stay with her as he had promised, and see her daily sacrificed to the
selfishness and cruelty of John Dent?  John Dent had caused the death
of young Lord Byng, and he had caused her to quarrel with Dick's
brother, who had left her, and gone away to die.  And should she be
married to this man, and must Dick stay with her always, bound by his
promise, unable to help, but seeing her misery?  Would that be
keeping his faith with her?  Would that be a return for her love?

It was her Ladyship's custom to drink chocolate at eight every
morning, and Dick always came to her room to have some with her.  The
morning after her birthday she waited a few minutes, and then told
Bridget she might take away the tray.

"Shall I send Philip to look for Master Richard?" the woman asked.

"No," answered Lady Dorothy.  "He hath gone away."

"Gone away, my Lady?" cried Bridget.

"Yes; he rode out at sunrise on the pony.  I saw him.  I was up."

"But he should be back by now, my lady."

"He is not coming back, Bridget.  He stopped where the lane turns and
looked back at the house.  He was crying, I think.  Poor Dickie!  I
didn't wave to him.  He would have come back if I had.
I--I--expected it.  He fears his cousin, John Dent."

Lorry had pushed his way into the room.  He came up and laid his
black head on his mistress's knee.  With eyes and tail he told her
what faithless beings boys were, and the creatures to be trusted were
dogs, and dogs alone, his kind especially, and of his kind himself.

"You may go, Bridget," said her Ladyship.

Bridget flew downstairs, and flung herself, the tray, and her story
into her husband's pantry.

"But I'll never believe it of him--never!  Him as we've nursed and
cockered!  Oh, no, man, no!  Master Richard's too much of a gentleman
born, I say.  His pony's mayhap fallen with him, he's that
venturesome with it.  You mark my words, unless he's killed with his
tricks and his jumpings, he'll be back at dinner-time."

But at dinner-time there was no Richard.

"He's dead, then, poor lamb!" cried Bridget.

"You're putting my Lady's wine in his goblet, you silly woman!"
Philip interrupted.  "Take yourself to your own place, look's ter!
Get along, wilt tha!  You an' your lambs!"




CHAPTER XVII

DICK GOES FOR HELP

Dick had wakened at dawn, the dawn he would never have seen but for
her.  He dressed quickly in the silken clothes of yesterday.  "They
will less likely recognize me on the way if I go finely clad," he
thought.  He said his prayers, took his long riding-boots under his
arm, slipped out of his room, paused to listen, then crept stealthily
along the corridor, down the stairs, and into the hall.  Here he
paused again to listen, then went swiftly down a long passage near
the kitchen, took the stable-key from its peg, unbarred the outer
door, and trembled as the bolt squeaked faintly.  Outside he pulled
on his boots, sped across the grass to the stable-yard, and saddled
and led out the pony.  Lorry was watching him all the time from his
kennel.  He was too wise to bark, for Dick had impressed upon him
that barking at sunrise was a vain pastime, fit only to rouse ladies
from their dreams and bring them to their casements to suggest the
grass was yet too damp for boys and dogs to walk through, or that the
air was still too raw for delicate chests and coughs like Dick's.
When the pony was saddled Dick went over and kissed Lorry's nose.

"Take care of her, old fellow," he said.  "And if I don't come back,
oh! make her understand 'tis neither fear nor faithlessness that
keeps me from her!  You would if you could speak."

Then he mounted, and, keeping on the grass, rode down into the lane.
When Lorry realized that, in spite of Dick's kiss and his own good
behaviour, he was not to be taken too, he gave a great bay of
disappointment that brought Lady Dorothy to her window in time to see
Dick's last look at the old house before he turned out of sight.  He
rode to the lane-head, and for the first time came out upon the
highroad.  It was all uphill, and the fat pony's progress slow.  On
the ridge of the hill, when they reached it, he looked down the long,
straight, dusty way he knew so well, where the travellers came out of
the clouds at one end and went into the trees on the other.  There, a
speck in the haze, miles down, lay the inn of the Seven Thorns.

"Come up, Fairy," said Dick, whipping his pony to a canter, and they
went down the hill bravely in a cloud of dust.

The landlord was just opening his shutters at the Seven Thorns--Mr.
Tomlinson, the sleek and plausible, as plausible as ever, returned in
safety after his adventures.  In Dick's nervous grip on the reins as
they passed, the pony read a command to stop, and he stopped, to
Dick's discomfort.

"A fine day, young gentleman," said the landlord, bowing.  "Will your
honour stay and breakfast?  Methinks the horse's shoe goes loose--on
the off hind-foot, my lord."

Dick struck in a spur.  Fairy bounded forward.  Without answering,
Dick galloped for the woods.

"He didn't know me, though," he said to himself.  But he had shaken
in his saddle at the sound of his old master's voice.  He wondered
if, behind in the inn-yard, some poor wretch of a bruised and hungry
boy was toiling through his work--the familiar weary work.

They had passed the forest-trees, Arncastor was in sight.  Dick
caught sight of a wide river, a bridge with soldiers on it, meadows
dotted with tents, and the gray town behind, with dancing flags on
the church towers, and then Fairy lurched forward, recovered himself,
and stood still.

"What now, sir?" Dick demanded impatiently.

Fairy looked round with a gentle whinny, and Dick got down.

"Your shoe, you stupid little beast?"

Yes, that was it, and Fairy affected a pathetic and extreme lameness.
The shoe was left behind on the hill.  A little way from the bridge,
on Dick's side of the water, was an inn--a large, comfortable,
happy-looking place--the Blue Boar--very different from the Seven
Thorns.  Dick, leading his pony, walked to the inn, and whilst Fairy
was attended to he asked for breakfast.  Lady Dorothy had given him
money from time to time, and as there was little to spend it on in
her surroundings, Dick had a purseful at his disposal now.  He had a
good breakfast of trout and ham-and-eggs, and strawberries and new
milk.  The landlady took him into especial care and favour from the
first.  "As sweet a spoken little lord as ever stepped," she said.

"I'm not a lord," said Dick, nodding to her.  "But you're very kind,
and I like you, and I wish you'd presently let me speak to you in
private."

Of course the good woman would do anything for such a pretty young
squire.  The fact was, during breakfast Dick had heard talk amongst
the soldiers and others in the inn-parlour that had taken away what
little confidence in himself he had possessed.  His ideas were of the
vaguest.  He had meant to find Giles's master amongst the Cavaliers
at Arncastor, and to entreat him for help, for Giles's sake.  After
that he had not dared to plan or think of anything.  But he had
gathered, from the company breakfasting at the same time as himself,
that no one could get into the town without stating his name and
business to the officer at the bridge, who handed it on to his
superior, and he to a third; and then, if all seemed satisfactory,
the person would be admitted with a pass.  Some of the gentlemen and
the officers and nobles passed unquestioned with whom they pleased.
But Dick had no satisfactory account of himself or his business to
offer, and to give his name, he thought, meant ruin at the outset.
If he had only learnt the name of Giles's master, and could have
asked to see him.  Dick had not foreseen these difficulties.  He was
very simple, but he had a way of placing implicit confidence in
anyone who was kind to him.  In the present trouble he had an
inspiration to take the handsome, motherly landlady into the case,
and entreat for advice.  She had an honest eye, and an air that meant
firm support if she deemed you worthy of regard.  So Dick explained
to her, alone in her own room, that he was on urgent family business,
that he must see a gentleman of the court immediately, and would she
tell him how best he might get into the town.  He could not give his
name, and his business could only be confided to the gentleman in
question.

"And his name?" asked she.

"I do not know his name," Dick said; "I have only seen him once."

The landlady shook her head.

"Where do you come from, sir?" she said.

Dick thought there was no harm in answering that question.

"I live with the Lady Dorothy Byng."

"Ah, then," she cried, "old Philip Wayland is my uncle that's butler
to her ladyship!"

"He'd have come on this errand if he could," said Dick, "but he
couldn't.  He--that's just it."

"Is it her ladyship's business?"

"I've made it mine," said Dick.  "'Tis mine."

"And you want to see this gentleman?"

"I must see him," said Dick.

"Is he about the court, then?"

"Always where the King is," Dick replied.

"One of his gentlemen?  An Esquire-of-the-body, or that?"

Dick was doubtful.

"I think he was a great lord," he said.  "He wore rich jewels, and
everyone bowed to him."

"Umph," she said, "there's a plenty of fine birds at court still.
But, now--  Bless the child!  Don't look that piteous--eh, don't!
What you want is to get into Arncastor, and stand somewhere nigh
where the King lodges, and see the courtiers pass.  When your
gentleman comes along--

"That's it!" Dick cried, embracing her.  "You have it!  Now, how to
get in?"

"Dear only knows, my chuck; but--mercy me! there's Lionel!"

"Who's Lionel?" asked Dick.

"He's my sister's son," she explained, "and a man of my Lord
Newcastle's."

She whisked out of the room, and returned in a minute with a handsome
young man in the Newcastle livery.  To him she explained Dick's case,
whilst the boy stood anxiously by her side.

"Simple as swallowing," said Lionel cheerfully at the end of the
tale.  "Supposing, of course, my young gentleman doesn't mind a bit
of masquerading?"

"I don't mind anything," Dick assured him hastily.

"What you want, sir," said the cheerful young man, "is to stand where
the courtiers do pass; but that, sir, mustn't be on the road.  You'd
have no chance in the throng and amongst the soldiers.  You should
see them one by one to recognize your friend, eh?"

"Go on!  Go on!" Dick begged.

"Why, then," said Lionel, "to work that, sir, you must be got into
His Majesty's lodgings.  Now, to-night I am on duty in a passage
looking into the hall that the King crosses on his way to Her
Majesty's supper-room.  My Lord Newcastle sups with Their Majesties
to-night, with Prince Rupert, and the Earl of Lumley, and a number of
other peers and gentlemen.  I'm to wait in this passage, taking with
me a lad with a torch, to attend my master home.  Now, if the young
gentleman isn't above it, and will drop a cloak over his braveries
and carry a torch, I'll take him with me instead of one of my Lord's
pages.  He can go into the town with me unmolested.  Now, sir?"

"To-night?" said Dick sadly.  "Not till to-night?"

"Why no," said Lionel.  "I'm taking a holiday, you see, sir."  He
winked at the landlady.  "And Susan, you see, sir--Susan--"

"Susan's no daughter of me if she looks at you again," interposed the
landlady, "should you fail to see the young gentleman through!"

Lionel protested that he would.  They might depend on him for that.
It was Dick's only chance of penetrating that net-work of formalities
and customs that surround a king.  This was his only hope.  He must
pass the intervening hours as best he might, and wait patiently for
evening.  Lionel was a good-natured youth, and Dick's pale-faced
anxiety touched him.

"See you, sir," he said kindly, "I'll do my best.  You shall have
every chance.  We'll take our stand early, before the supper-hour.
We'll be there before His Majesty comes in from the gardens, where
he'll be walking if the evening's fine.  If your friend's not with
him then, we'll hope he'll be there as he goes to supper, and if not
then, we'll trust he may be when the King returns.  We'll find him,
never fear!"

"You're a good man, Lionel," said Dick, shaking hands with him
heartily.  "I'll never forget you.  If they--if I fail, you mustn't
think I still don't thank you, for I shall.  There!  There's my
purse.  Take it all!"

He thrust his purse into the young man's hand.  Lionel tossed it up
to the ceiling, caught it cleverly, and handed it back.

"Better keep it to the end of the day, sir," he said.  "My aunt
there, she'll run you up a mighty bill, and want the money or the
life of you.  She'll stand no nonsense, won't my aunt."

"That she won't, you naughty fellow!" cried his aunt.

"And oh, Lionel," Dick entreated, "don't forget me!  Don't forget to
come."

"Beshrew me!  Nay, sir, you may pin your faith to Lionel."

And the cheerful youth ran off to spend the day with Susan.

"There's no harm cometh to a man," quoth he, "by serving a young
gentleman who talks with his eyes--eh, my dear, pitiful!--and has a
purse of gold and a friend at court.  Your good-hearted man, Susan,
ah! there are rewards and gold for your good-hearted man."

"But you haven't the gold," remarked Susan.

"Wait till the job's done, my shrewd one," said he.




CHAPTER XVIII

IN THEIR MAJESTIES' LODGINGS

"At least," Dick reflected as he and Lionel crossed the bridge and
went up the street into Arncastor.  "At least, I have not been
recognized or stopped yet.  And I might meet him now--any minute."

As he thought so, Lionel pulled him aside.  Three gentlemen were
passing, and as Lionel bared his head Dick did also, and then turned
pale.  He met well-remembered eyes fixed on him for a
second--indifferently, indeed, but he quailed.

"That was his highness Prince Rupert," said Lionel as they went on
again.  "The tallest of the three."

Dick drew a long breath.  It was the gentleman who had teased him at
Lumley.

Another hundred yards farther and Lionel's hat was off again.  Again
Dick saw a familiar face and met the blank expression of eyes that
had once frowned on him severely.

"My master, my Lord Newcastle," said Lionel.

"My master, too, for the time," said Dick with another sigh of
relief.  "How fortunate he did not stay you to ask why a strange lad
was with you as page."

Lionel laughed.  "Od zooks, sir!  His lordship scarce knows his page
from his bed-post.  These great men heed their servants very little.
They know their falcon's peculiarities and their hounds' tempers,
but, save your innocence, their servants are as wood or stone."

Dick thought of Giles and his master.

"There's His Majesty, I grant you," Lionel observed.  "They say he
knows his servants.  He never forgets a face.  But I know no one else
like that."

"I know one," said Dick.

"So?  Well, here we are!"

They were in a side street having a long bare wall, with a door round
which stood a group of soldiers.  Gentlemen's servants in livery,
calling their masters' names, were hurrying in and out.  Pages in
silken suits were hustling about, chaffing the troopers and getting
in everyone's way.

"My Lord of Newcastle!" Lionel cried, and he and Dick were admitted.
They crossed a court to a door at the back of the house, a large
rambling mansion occupied now by the King and Queen.  The guards here
knew Lionel, and he stayed to talk with them, whilst Dick, carrying
his unlit torch and holding his cloak about him, stood near,
shivering with excitement and suspense.  At last Lionel turned to him.

"Come along.  His Majesty has not come in yet from walking.  We're in
luck, you see," he said as they threaded a crowded hall and a
corridor thronged with guards and servants.  "For, after supper,
there is to be a masque--sort of play, sir--in the gardens by
torchlight, and every gentleman about the court will be present.
Such bravery!  Such music and singing!  Now the Queen's back all the
court's alive."

Dick followed him into a panelled gallery.  There were benches along
the walls, and Lionel sat down on one near the farthest end.  Close
to them four broad white stone steps led down into a great square
hall, with costly hangings, lounges, and pictures.  Wide doors stood
open, and beyond, Dick caught a glimpse of a beautiful lawn, where
splendidly attired ladies and courtiers were strolling up and down.
In the hall were guards with gleaming cuirasses, and a group of young
gentlemen in the costliest dresses were lounging at a window,
chattering.  As Dick watched, a page in the Royal livery ran in from
the garden and spoke to one of these.  He parted from his companions
and came up the steps by Dick.

"Will His Majesty be coming in soon, sir?" asked Lionel, bowing
respectfully.

"He has just gone in by the Queen's entrance," said the gentleman,
and hurried on.

"That is one of His Majesty's Gentlemen of the Bedchamber," said
Lionel.  "We shall have to wait now an hour or more, till he passes
to the supper."

"Oh, this waiting!" Dick sighed.  "If only I knew his name!"

"Patience!" urged Lionel.  "Sit down here, and kick your heels."

"But he might go through the hall!" Dick cried.  "I must keep
looking."

"Point him out to me," said Lionel yawning.  "Then I'll learn his
name and be after him like a flash."

The minutes passed heavily enough.  The hall was getting dusky now.
Suppose he passed down there, and Dick did not recognize him?  Or,
suppose he came, and did not know the boy again, and would not hear
his story.  He might hand Dick over to the guards without a word of
explanation.  Ah, how slow the time went!  Yet, how fast!  It would
be to-morrow very soon, and nothing done yet.

But there was movement in the hall.  The guard was changed.  A
delicious sound of harps and violins came from the Queen's apartments
on the left.  Servants were bringing lights--thousands of lights, it
seemed to Dick.  The hall glowed with a soft radiance, and the
soldiers' equipments winked like silver.  Dick stole out on the top
step.  The lights from below shone on his pale face.

"Stand back, there!" called an officer irritably.  "Whose are you?"

"My Lord Newcastle's!" cried Lionel, coming to Dick's assistance.

"What are you doing?"

"What you should be doing," Lionel retorted; "minding our own
business."

There was a very hurriedly-suppressed laugh.  The officer had only
just time to spring back to his place, saluting, as Prince Rupert
sauntered past on his way to the Queen's rooms--a perfect dream of
scarlet and gold, with his tall fair head, and superb, easy grace.
His page, carrying his cloak and plumed hat, followed him as far as
the steps, where he bowed sedately to his master's back, and then
came up to join Lionel in the gallery.  He would have proceeded to
quiz Dick, but Dick was far too intent upon his own affairs to heed
questions, or answer them.

"New to his place?" said the scented page scornfully.

"Not so new but he can keep others in theirs," Lionel responded.
They kept up a lively bickering, for the servants were rivals as much
as their masters, whilst Dick, all eyes, watched the brilliant scene
below.  The unhurried movements, the decorous laughter, the soft
lights were very enthralling.  But what now?  A gentleman darted down
the steps, brushing past him, spoke to the guard, and came back.

"What's the news, friend?" asked the page.

"His Majesty," the gentleman replied, sitting down by them.  "He goes
to speak to the Prince before supper."

"Hey, big eyes!" cried the page, "step out and see thy King!"  He
gave Dick a push which unintentionally sent him flying out upon the
top step.  His torch flew from his hand, clattering into the hall
below.  The King's gentleman cuffed the page.  Lionel sprang to his
feet.  The guardsman at the foot of the steps wheeled with a growl of
anger.  The rest saluted.  A gentleman passing stopped and looked up.
Dick gave a cry, plunged down the steps, and was pinioned by the
guardsman.

"Let me go!" he cried.  "Sir!--for pity's sake!"

"Let him go," said the gentleman.  "He is a friend of mine.  Stand
back!"

Dick had contracted an odd habit at the inn of clasping and wringing
his hands, whilst his eyes looked up in such a way that no one less
than a brute could have denied him anything.  As the guard,
astonished, fell back, he stood before Giles's master in this
pathetic way, saying: "Sir, help me for Giles's sake!"

The gentleman, somewhat moved, stretched out his hand.  Dick took it
in both his own and shook it heartily.

"Great powers!" murmured Lionel, staggering back.

"Well I--never--did!" gasped the appalled and tittering page.

"What help do you need, Sir Richard Chester?" asked Giles's master,
stroking his moustache to hide a smile.  "Is it another castle to
relieve?"

"No, sir," said Dick, conscious of the staring eyes about him.  "'Tis
about my cousin Dorothy--the Lady Dorothy Byng."

"What of her?" demanded the gentleman, waving back a brilliant
creature with a white wand, who was bearing down upon them.

"We--we must stop her marrying--" Dick began.

"Stop her marrying?" the gentleman said with a lift of the eyebrows.
"We mustn't meddle with ladies' marriages, must we?  They never thank
us.  When did you last see Giles?  Eh?  What now?"  Dick had hidden
his face in his hands.  The gentleman was laughing at him.  All round
him people were smiling.  The page in the gallery above was giggling.
No one would listen to him then.  Giles's master touched him gently.

"Answer me.  When did you last see Giles?"

"Giles is dead," said Dick, raising his head.  "You must know that,
sir, or I would have gone to him instead of you.  He wouldn't have
given me up!  I know what will happen to me.  But do--do help my
cousin!  She saved my life yesterday.  Oh, sir!  I do not care--you
may do what you like with me."

"Thanks, Dick."  And Giles's master took his hand, with a swift,
rather stern glance at the amazed guards, the tittering page above,
the official with the white wand, waiting with a kind of protesting,
yet patient air, behind.  "That being so, you shall come with me a
little.  Excuse me to His Highness, my lord.  I shall be with him
presently."  He walked away with Dick, the noble lord bowing
profoundly.

"What think you of that?" gasped Lionel, looking after them.

"Death," answered the page gloomily, shaking his head.  "Do you often
bring lunatics to court, sirrah?"




CHAPTER XIX

GILES'S MASTER AGAIN

Giles's master took Dick into a small panelled room, lighted by the
setting sun only, and seating himself in a carved arm-chair, motioned
Dick to a stool at his side.

"And who told you Giles was dead?" he asked, after speaking in French
for some moments to a gentleman at the door.

This meant the telling of Dick's disappearance from Lumley, saved
from disgrace by Master Purvis, as he thought.  He had scarcely begun
the recital before a door at the far end of the room opened, and a
gentleman in a white velvet suit stood on the threshold, bowing.
Dick stopped.

"Go on," said Giles's master.  "The gentleman is a friend of mine.
My lord, will you have the goodness to wait in the window yonder?
Thanks.  Well, Dick.  They told you there was an order out for your
arrest and so forth?"

Dick went on again.  His confidence in the gentleman's kindness was
restored, and as he had spoken to him at Lumley so he spoke now, and
told him all about the Seven Thorns, and of his flight across the
fields, and how the Lady Dorothy Byng befriended him, and then turned
out to be his cousin.  But there the gentleman stayed him.

"The Lady Dorothy Byng was your father's first wife's niece," he
said.  "She was your step-brother's cousin, not yours, Dick."

Dick sighed.  "That's a pity," he said.  "She asked me to have her
for a cousin.  I was very glad to.  Anyone would, I think."

Giles's master laughed, and the gentleman in the window half-turned
round.

"So they told you Giles was dead?" said his master.  "Were you
grieved then?"

Dick did not answer.  He bit his lips, but the tears would come.

"Sorrow no longer," said the gentleman quickly.  "Giles is alive!"

"Alive!" Dick cried, so loud and so joyously that the man in the
window took a step into the room, quite startled.

"Alive and well," said Giles's master quietly.  "Why did you never
try to find out?  Why, if we may enquire, did you never find your way
back to your friends and learn the truth?"

"I dare not, sir," said Dick, hanging his head.

"Ha! the bogey of a proclamation?  All a make-believe, my child.
There was never anything but kindness waiting for you with Giles and
his--master."

"But I didn't know," said Dick.  "Cousin Dorothy said it could not be
true, indeed, but I did not believe her.  She--she said my idea of my
own importance was sadly exaggerated."  He imitated her manner a
little.

"Nay, if you'd had the least idea of your own importance you'd have
got back to us in spite of John Dent's trickery.  'Twas all John
Dent, Dick.  Why, Giles--he broke his heart when we failed to find
you.  And I--why," he said, touching his high forehead, with a smile,
"I fancy a new wrinkle came here with puzzling about your so sudden
disappearance.  Yes, indeed!"

Dick laughed.

"So the Lady Dorothy did not believe the proclamation story?" resumed
the gentleman.

"No," said Dick, blushing.  "She would have had me come to Arncastor
weeks ago, but I would not.  She said I was a coward--"  He stopped
abruptly, but went on in a second: "I must have been, too.  If I'd
come--but I dare not be taken, and--and disgraced before you and--and
the others."

"Yet you came to-day?"

"To try and save her," Dick said.

"She should not have called you a coward, I think," Giles's master
observed.  "But, come.  Why does she want saving?  We will have that
part now."

"She has promised to marry John Dent," Dick began; and whilst he told
of his cousin's goodness, and John Dent's cruelty, the gentleman in
white drew nearer, unobserved.

"Sir, you will help me, won't you?" Dick entreated.

The gentleman in white took a step forward, but Giles's master begged
him to have patience a little longer, and he returned to his window
in silence.

"I will help you to the best of my ability," said Giles's master,
taking Dick's hand kindly, "and for your sake.  The lady herself
seems of a variable temper.  As I said before, she should not have
called you a coward."

"Ah, sir," Dick cried, "she's all goodness--all kindness!  She never
meant to hurt me, and she begged my pardon--she, a great lady.  I
love her very much, more than anyone, except Giles.  We agreed on
everything in the world, I think--except Giles," he added.

"Ha!" said the gentleman.  "And what ailed her Ladyship of Giles?"

Dick explained as well as he could that it appeared that great ladies
could not appreciate courage and virtue when they went in rags.  And
he felt the gentleman upon whose knee he leant shake with laughter.

"Ay," he said, "that's it, Dick.  These great ladies!  They will send
their slaves to the ends of the earth to fetch them a bodkin.  Call
them cowards, yet expect their hearts to be laid at their feet with a
'Do me the honour to tread here, madam'!  And you are bent upon
serving this fastidious dame, Dick?  And upon making me serve her
too?"

"For me," said Dick, "I would die for her.  I have said what she hath
done for me.  And there is another reason, if I have not shown you,
sir, why I must help her."

"And the other reason?"

Dick looked round.  The light was very dim now, but he could see the
gentleman in white impatiently tapping his leg with his
rapier-sheath, his face turned to the window.

"'Tis about my brother, who is dead," said Dick in a low voice.
"'Tis her story, told me in--in confidence.  But I think, sir, no one
should hear it but you, and you because you will help."

"Quite right," said Giles's master, with a swift glance towards the
window.  "You may whisper."  He bent his head, and Dick, slipping his
arm round his neck, whispered his tale.

The gentleman in white stood so strangely still he might have been
fairly accused of holding his breath to hear the whisper.

"Well," said Giles's master at the close, "I hold you're right, Dick.
Your very life is hers so long as she needs it.  Should she ever find
anyone else to make her happy, will you come to me?  I confess I
should like you about me.  True, I have Giles; but Giles, you may
have noticed, Giles is a very remarkable person."

"Ay, indeed!" was Dick's hearty response.

"And to be trusted," continued his master, "with great matters.  I
have to send him from me; and then--well, Dick--I have no one near me
quite so faithful as Giles.  I don't know whether I am called a good
master or not.  It seems to me I bring my servants nothing but
misfortune and privation--sometimes death."  He sighed.

Dick laid his hand on his friend's affectionately.  "I'd never care
for that, sir," he said earnestly.  "I've been near death.  It
doesn't matter.  If I could be with you, and sometimes see dear
Giles, I'd be quite happy, if Cousin Dorothy was happy too.  Why,
sir, I've been beaten and been hungered by those I served.  Do you
think mere privation with you and Giles would be hard?"

Just then the door opened softly, a curtain was drawn back, and a
servant appeared with lights.

"If you would have the goodness to say we do not need them," said
Giles's master to the gentleman in white.  "Thanks."

The servant retreated, bowing; but Dick had seen the lights fall on
the gentleman in white--a figure as superb as Prince Rupert's and a
dress beautiful and rich.  A jewel had flashed in his sword-hilt, and
a "George" hung from a blue ribbon at his neck.  What a thing to be a
courtier!

As the gentleman came back he shot a piercing glance at the two
figures in the dusk, and, pointing especially at Dick, he said
something in a voice so low that Dick only caught the last
words--"The audacity!"  The boy resented it, and Giles's master
seemed to disagree with the sentiment also, for he put his arm round
the boy's shoulder, with a slight laugh, and, stooping, kissed him
lightly on the brow.

"No audacity!" he said.  "Are you jealous, my lord?  Dick once told
me he loved Giles with all his heart because there was no one else to
love--no father and no mother.  And his brother, whilst he lived, I
suppose, had never even looked at him.  Yet Dick knows how to love,
and should not lack a return of it.  No doubt, my lord, you have
heard something of the tale he's been telling me.  Perchance you
found it somewhat interesting?"

The gentleman in white bowed.

"As to that which we took care you should not hear," proceeded
Giles's master, "suffice it, for the completion of the story, that
the Lady Dorothy Byng once had a fancy for my friend, Dick's brother.
And, we might add--might we not, Dick?--that she cherishes his memory
still--more or less."

Dick said gravely: "She loves him still."

"Therefore Dick is bound to help her now.  And I have bound myself to
help Dick.  And I must beg you, my lord, to see Giles helps us all.
We'll place the matter, Dick, in the hands of Giles--a delicate
revenge for her scorn of him, eh?  He shall order all he needs, and
take this traitor, John Dent, if he can catch him, send him hither
for trial, and have done with him.  He shall scatter John Dent's
friends, if he hath any, to the winds.  He shall take you home to the
Lady Dorothy Byng, with my greetings.  And our dear, good Giles shall
ask her if she cannot--it will be hard if she cannot--find some other
companion and give you to me.  There!  Have we marked the part of
each player and disposed of the villain of the piece?"

The gentleman in white bowed, whilst Dick enthusiastically thanked
his friend.  Giles's master made as if to rise, so Dick stood up.

"Where shall I find dear Giles?" he asked excitedly.

"Dear Giles, eh?  Oh, he will be with you as soon as I am gone!" He
held Dick's hand a moment, looking down at him half with amusement
half with tenderness, glanced up at the other gentleman, and moved
towards the door.  There, stopping suddenly, he looked back.

"I have recalled one person for whom no part is assigned," he said.
"The parson, Dick; be sure he is treated well, sir.  I could wish
Giles would find some use for him.  Maybe he will."

The gentleman in white drew back the curtain and opened the door.

"Sir!" cried Dick, springing after him, "one moment!  Will you tell
me your name?"

"Charles," said Giles's master.

"Charles?" Dick repeated.  "Charles what?"

"Stuart," the gentleman answered.  And the door shut.




CHAPTER XX

GILES

"The King?" Dick cried, half-incredulously.  "The King!"  He grew
hot, then cold, as he stood there, half-expecting some awful
retribution to follow on his audacities.  But then the King had not
been angry; he had not seemed displeased.  "The King!" he cried again.

"The King!" echoed a voice behind him--a voice that carried him back
to the leads of Dent.  "Have you no word for Giles after all these
months?"

"Giles!" Dick cried, spinning round.  But there was only the
gentleman in white, whom the King had addressed as "My lord".

"Don't you know me, little Captain?"  The gentleman moved to the
window, where the last glow from the evening sky was lingering still.
"See!" he said.

Dick searched the face.  Yes, there were the eyes, the gray, kind
eyes of Giles; but the hair cut square across the brow, and falling
in curls on the shoulders, was not like Giles's.  The long beard was
gone, too, and under the upturned moustaches was a mouth Dick did not
know.  But there were the eyes, and as his own scanned more closely
the costly dress, he saw his own little dagger in its worn red
leather sheath, hanging by the courtier's rapier at his side.

"Giles!" he said softly, and flung himself into his friend's arms.

Some time later Giles said: "But, come!  We have affairs, Dick.  To
business, with what appetite we may!"

"Well, I'm hungry enough," said Dick simply.

There was a tap at the door, and a magnificent gentleman entered.

"Her Majesty holds you excused from supping with her, my lord," he
said, bowing.  "And His Majesty requests me to add he will not expect
to see you these three days, with his farewells to you, and," said
the gentleman, almost choking over the words, as if they outraged his
sense of propriety, "his love to Sir Richard Chester of Dent."

"Convey my most profound thanks to Her Majesty, sir, for her
graciousness," said Giles calmly.  "And my humble thanks to His
Majesty, also, if you please."

"And my humble thanks also," Dick stammered.  "And my love, sir,
please say, all Dick Chester's love."

The gentleman visibly shuddered as he bowed.

"Dick!  Dick!" Giles said, laughing, "I should never wonder if that
gentleman had a fit.  What do you mean by sending messages like that,
sir?  Ah, but you're fickle!  First me, then my master, then the--the
Lady Dorothy is it?  Then again my master.  All your love, you pygmy!
Cæsar's ghost!  Where do you keep it all?"

Dick laughed.

"Don't you love people, then, Giles?  You do His Majesty, and--and--"

"And who, prithee?" demanded Giles.

"Why, and me, Giles dear," said Dick serenely.

"Come along," said Giles laughing again.  "We've made free with His
Majesty's rooms long enough.  We will go and hunt up some officer who
will take his troop over to your place to-night.  'Twould never do
for us to sleep and let John Dent steal a march on us, eh?  I know my
man!  As like as not he'll hear of your coming hither and do his best
to outwit us."

"But shall we not go to-night, Giles?  Her Ladyship will be so
disturbed by my absence."

"Your arrival would disturb her more at this hour, surely, Dick?  The
officers I send will keep her--her household safe until morning, and
one of them, when he has seen that all is well, shall ride back even
to-night and report to us."

They were going down the passage that led from the King's rooms to
the hall.  In the hall the guard saluted Giles, and looked somewhat
sourly at Dick.

"Giles," said Dick, pulling his friend back as he was turning towards
the door, "there's Lionel!  I have but just recalled him."

"Who and what--" began Giles.

"He brought me here," Dick hurriedly explained.  "He's a man of my
Lord Newcastle's.  I want to thank him now."  He had dragged Giles to
the foot of the steps.  "I'd never have got here but for him.  Will
you come, Giles?  He's up here."

"I'll thank him myself, do you leave me breath enough," said Giles
good-humouredly.

The corridor above was crowded with noblemen's and ladies' servants
and pages, some playing cards, some sitting, some standing, but all,
it seemed to Dick, talking at once.  He could not see Lionel
anywhere.  He would have pressed through the throng to seek him, but
that, it appeared, was not Giles's way.  Drawing Dick back he said
quietly, but in a voice that stilled the tumult, and travelled down
the corridor and into the passage beyond: "Is there here a man of my
Lord Newcastle's--one Lionel?"

In the silence, Lionel, on a bench in a corner, whispered to Prince
Rupert's page: "There!  Farewell, sir!  I'm
dead!--dismissed!--undone!"

"Serves you right," said the page sweetly.  "Don't mind my toes--a
dead man has his privileges."

"There he is," said Dick, as Lionel, looking by no means cheerful,
came out of the listening and looking crowd.  Dick darted forward,
shook hands with him, and overwhelmed him with thanks.  Then Giles
stretched his hand to the embarrassed youth.

"There are my thanks, too, my friend," he said.  "This is Sir Richard
Chester, and we are all right glad to have him here."

"And I'm in no trouble, my lord?" Lionel gasped, turning the gold
pieces Giles had left in his palm.

"Not a breath," said Giles.

"Who'll bear the torch?" Dick asked.  "What will my Lord Newcastle
say when he finds no boy at all with you, Lionel?"

"Eh?" Giles said, "what torch?"

Dick explained, and Lionel looked a little doubtful and distressed.

"Oh, say to his lordship I stole his torchbearer!" Giles said coolly.
"Say it was Sir Richard Chester, my man.  He will hold you without
blame.  Good-night!"

"What think you to those?" Lionel asked, as, having pushed his way
through the curious crowd, he sat down again by the page, and spread
out his gold pieces.

"Bribes," said the page, sniffing.  "Who is the child?"

"The child who held Dent Castle, and disappeared from Lumley."

The page whistled.

"Oh, Lionel! a perfect gold-mine!  I wish that I'd discovered and
recovered the pretty treasure."

The "pretty treasure" and Giles were by this time out in the streets
of Arncastor, which were thronged with merry people going across the
river to view from the meadows the masque in the Queen's gardens.
They stopped at a house whence came a sound of singing, where the
light from an unshuttered upper window shone out into the street.  By
this light Dick, chancing to look up at Giles, saw a subtle change in
him.  A minute since he had been laughing and kindly, now he was
grave, unapproachable.  As they climbed the stairs a high, clear
voice was singing a song, and as Giles opened the door of the festal
chamber out rolled a rollicking chorus, with a clinking of glasses
and stamping of feet that almost deafened Dick.  About twenty
gentlemen were gathered about a table, with doublets undone, belts on
the floor, sashes untied, and making clamour enough for a town.
Giles waited, surveying them, till the end of the song, and then
asked, in his well-modulated voice and a tone of ice:

"Is Captain Slingsby here?"

"My lord," cried one of the company, "a health! a health!  The King!"

"God save the King!" cried another.

"God save the King, with all my heart!" said Giles, taking the glass
pushed towards him, and drinking, hat in hand.

"Confusion to his foes!" cried another voice.

"Ah!" said Giles, "I see enough and to spare amongst his friends,
gentlemen.  Is Captain Slingsby here?"

"Be not too hard on us, my lord," said a young man at the end of the
table, rising and bowing.  "Gentlemen, I give you my lord, his
health!"

"Your health, my lord!" they all cried together, and the glasses
clinked again.

Giles bowed gracefully, and asked in exactly the same tone as before:

"Is Captain Slingsby here?"

A tall young man, very flushed, with a handsome face and fair
love-locks, came forward unwillingly.  Giles slowly looked him over
from head to foot.

"I was about to apologize, sir, for coming in the middle of supper.
I am too late.  I perceive you are long past the end," he said.

The young man's face darkened.

"'Tis not for you to say if I have had enough," he observed sulkily.

"Enough?" Giles replied, with a lift of the eyebrow.  "I doubt that
word would not have occurred to me, sir, to describe
the--er--quantity in question.  I will not trouble you, sir.
Good-night."

But in the meantime the other gentlemen had demanded Dick's name, and
having learnt it, had drunk his health noisily.  The boy, imitating
Giles, bowed when they had finished.

"We have all heard of Sir Richard Chester," said the gentleman at the
head of the table.  "How is it, Sir Richard, that you are not amongst
us?"

"I live with my cousin," said simple Dick, somehow feeling an excuse
was needed for his not appearing amongst the King's friends.  "She
lives alone.  She cannot spare me yet."

"She?" cried another gentleman.  "Is she fair, Sir Richard?"

"Is she young?" questioned a second.

"Hath she eyes like yours?" another asked eagerly.

"Ay, doth that melting orb run in the family?" enquired another.

"A health!" shouted the one at the head of the table.  "Give us her
health, Sir Richard," and he pushed Dick a glass of wine.

"My cousin!" said Dick bravely, lifting the brimming glass.

"Nay, her name!  Her name!  Give us her name!" they cried.

Dick looked along the table at the flushed faces, the unsteady hands.
Either the thought of his cousin's name on those lips awoke a
delicacy in him, or the expression on Giles's face had warned him,
but suddenly their mirth and their manners repelled him.

"You're none of you fit to speak her name," he said, "and your
glasses have had a score of healths drunk out of them to-night."

He was unprepared for the explosion of wrath that followed.  Someone
else was, though.  Giles laid his hand on his shoulder, and took the
glass out of his hand.

"He is right," he said, "though he cuts us, gentlemen.  We are not
fit--there is no company fit--for her name to be called in.  So I
give you 'Dick's Cousin!' her health! and not another out of the
glass."

He tossed off the wine, and flung the glass over his shoulder.  With
a shout the gentlemen sprang to their feet and followed his
lordship's lead.  The crash of glass made Dick's ears tingle.

"And there is my purse to pay the host's bill," cried Giles.

A cheer followed them downstairs and into the street.

"When you don't want your head broken, Dick," Giles remarked, "and
yet want to express disapproval, say 'we'.  It hath a pleasant sound,
and puts your hearers on your side, keeping out ill-blood."

"What now, Giles?" Dick asked, as they once again halted before a
house with lighted casements and sounds of life within.

"To find an officer sober enough for our work, Dick.  Slingsby
promised me to keep clear of that set of ribald idiots, and there he
is with them again.  Let's try this man, Captain Harland."

He left the boy in a parlour below, for he saw he was tired out by
this time, and in a few minutes returned.

"We'll sup here now, Dick," he said cheerfully, "and then, what say
you to spending the night over the river at your friends' of the Blue
Boar?  My man shall take my things over.  Three days' absence!  Dick,
lad, what if her Ladyship won't take me in, even for one?"

Dick smiled sleepily.

"She will, Giles, when she sees you," he said.

After supper Giles took Dick out to see Captain Harland and his
troopers start.  The sight roused him for the moment.  He caught
sight of young Captain Slingsby casting wistful eyes at Giles.

"Why are you here, sir?" Giles demanded, when he saw the young
officer.

"I--I ran after you to ask pardon," Slingsby stammered.  "I'm quite
sober.  I--I got them to pump on my head."

He moved his neck uneasily under his damp yellow curls.

"Captain Harland is commanding for me, sir," said Giles.

"I can ride to serve you, my lord, if I may not command," said the
young man quietly, "and I will, unless you forbid me.  God knows I'm
a fool!"

"Harland," Giles called to the man at the head of the troop, "you
know what I said of sending someone back to-night with news?"

"Yes, my lord."

"Be good enough to return to me yourself, and leave the command to
Slingsby."

"Very good, my lord," said the officer, smiling.

Young Slingsby leant from the saddle and wrung Giles's hand.  The
troop clattered off down the narrow street, out of sight.

"Now, we'll go and find my man, and over the water to bed, Dick,"
said Giles.

"Giles," said Dick, "I like what you did for that man.  He's a nice
man, too.  But, I say, Giles, when you're angry you cut."

"I am rather a bad brute when I'm rubbed the wrong way, Dick.  Hold
up!"

Dick stumbled.

"I'm that sleepy, Giles," he explained apologetically, "I can
scarcely walk."

"My lord," said a man, running up to them at this moment, "I followed
you from the inn."

"Oh, good!" said Giles, stopping.  "I shall be away for three days.
Bring my things to the Blue Boar, over the river.  Run, there's a
good lad."

The servant ran off.

"That's my man, Dick," said Giles.  "We need go no farther that way."

Dick had a very vague idea of what followed after that.  He thought
they were stopped on the bridge, and he heard Giles call out
"Lumley!" and someone said, laughing: "Pardon!  I did not see--did
not recognize your lordship"; and Giles called "Good-night!" as they
went on again.  It appeared to Dick that he was not walking, and he
wondered what Giles was doing, and why both he and the officer had
laughed when the latter said he had not recognized him.  It was
curious, also, that he could see nothing but stars.

"Where am I, Giles?" he murmured, moving his limbs uneasily.

"In the arms of Morpheus, my dear fellow," said Giles.  "And do not
kick him in the wind, I beg of you, or he will probably let you fall."




CHAPTER XXI

THE END OF JOHN DENT

Dick slept very heavily that night.  He woke once, and found Giles
bending over him, smiled comfortably, and fell asleep again; and the
very next minute, as it seemed to him, Giles was shaking him by the
shoulder, the sun was shining, the birds were singing, and his friend
impatient.

"Wake up, you dog in a blanket!" Giles cried.  "If you don't wake up,
I swear I'll go without you."

"Giles!" Dick cried, as if he had never seen him the night before,
and he was out of bed in a second.  Giles was dressed already, and
Dick's toilet was scrambled through, with frequent breaks for bursts
of confidence and conversation.  At last he was complete--collar and
sash, and decorously combed-out curls--in his rose-coloured silk and
his riding-boots.  Giles lounged up and stood beside him, in silk of
the same colour and a collar of superb point-lace.

"Who told you to wear that colour?" he demanded.

"My Cousin Dorothy gave it me--this suit--to wear on her birthday,"
Dick explained.  "'Rose-colour suits your dark man', she said."  And
he gave a comical little glance at himself in the mirror.  "'Tis her
favourite colour, moreover, and a gay, pretty hue, I think."

Giles walked to the window and looked out.

"And you wear the same," said Dick, following.  "Why, we might be
brothers, Giles."

Giles bowed.  "You flatter me, sir!  Or is it only with my clothes
you'd be akin?"

"I wish we were brothers, Giles," said Dick, sighing.  "I have no one
of my own, not even Cousin Dorothy now, since His Majesty saith we
are not truly related.  Wait a moment, Giles; I haven't said my
prayers yet.  Have you?"

"Long since," said Giles; but he waited for Dick with a good-humoured
smile.

"You can have me for as much your own as you like," he observed, as
Dick rose from his knees.

"But you're such a very--splendid person now, Giles," said Dick,
rather shyly.  "And, Giles, I remember they called you a lord last
night.  Were you a lord when we were at Dent?"

"No, a simple gentleman like yourself, by chance serving as
stableman, as by chance Sir Richard Chester served as boy at the inn."

"What is your name then, Giles?"

"Lumley--the Earl of Lumley, at your service."  He drew himself up
and saluted.  Then he cried: "Beshrew me, Dick, I'd forgotten!"  He
hunted amongst his things, and in a minute said: "Here, Dick, in
exchange for the dagger you gave me."

He laid in the boy's hands a little rapier, a perfect miniature of a
man's, with hilts of steel inlaid with silver, in a dainty sheath of
blue velvet, hung with little silver chains to an embroidered
baldric.  Dick's eyes danced, his cheeks flushed, and embracing the
gift with one arm he embraced the giver with the other.  Then he drew
the sword, and Giles told him it had been given to him years ago,
that it was made in Toledo, and that the Spanish words on its shining
surface might be translated as--"A trusty blade for a trusty blade".
"Which last is Richard Chester," he observed.

They then started down to find breakfast; and Dick, dashing on
before, dashed back again to say, with a rapturous sniff: "Come on,
Giles, 'tis trout!"

It was trout, and more ham-and-eggs, and strawberries and new milk
for Dick.  Giles, it seemed, preferred chocolate, "like my Cousin
Dorothy," said Dick; and Giles, setting down the dish, said: "If you
drink any more milk 'twill go to your head, Dick.  Come, sirrah!
Enough!  Time flies!"

"But I haven't half-finished the pitcher," Dick grumbled.

"Pest!" said Giles impatiently.  "'Twill churn as you ride, Dick.  My
faith! but those strawberries are fine!  'Tis scarce six yet."
Laughing, he sat down and fell to on the fruit.

Then they must call the landlady, and Dick must needs embrace her.

"Was ever a lad so fond of kissing!" Giles observed.

"And you found your friend, my pretty sir?" asked the landlady,
beaming upon them.

"Ay," answered Dick, laughing and blushing hotly.  "And, would you
believe it, 'twas the King!"

The landlady lifted her hands in amazement.

"Eh!" she cried, as Dick proceeded to tell his adventures, "but my
Lionel will have trouble for this."

"No," put in Giles reassuringly.  "My Lord Newcastle will not have a
word to say.  And if your Lionel loses his place ever, send him to
me, mistress.  But no heads will fall for Sir Richard Chester.  He
shakes his Sovereign by the hand--"

"Giles, I didn't know," interrupted Dick.

"'Tis all one to him," Giles proceeded.  "He knows he's bound to be
every man's favourite, and every lady's also, it seems," and he
smiled at the landlady.

Then he paid her bill several times over, with a trifle also for
Susan, did she ever care to set up house-keeping, as, from something
Sir Richard had said, seemed likely.  Dick laughed, and the landlady
bobbed curtsies and blessed his lordship's good heart.

"And won't the young gentleman tell us his name?" she asked; "that we
may remember him always."

She looked at Dick, who thought she meant his generous companion.

"This is Gi--the Earl of Lumley," he said.  She curtsied again.

"I recognized my lord," she said.  "'Twas yourself, I meant, sir."

"This is Sir Richard Chester," said Giles, as he turned Dick to the
door, since he seemed unable to tear himself away.  "He held a castle
for His Majesty last year--"

"'Twas you, Giles!" Dick interrupted.

"For a week," Giles continued calmly.  "And then he was lost, and we
find him again now, facing a great danger for a lady's sake."

"There was no danger, really," Dick said, with a flush of pride and
pleasure.

"You thought there was, which, I take it, amounts to the same thing."

The landlady did not quite understand this speech, but as they stood
together she thought they made a very pretty picture, so she held up
her hands again, and said: "Bless us and save us, now, just to look
at that!"

Outside, Dick found Fairy; and as the pony whinnied to him, and
rubbed its nose against his shoulder, the boy's conscience pricked
him.

"Oh, Giles," he said, wringing his hands, "I'm forgetting Cousin
Dorothy!  She'll be wondering, and--and--can't we start?"

"Don't do that!" said Giles hurriedly, catching his hands and drawing
them apart.  "Here! we're all ready!  Get up!"

He held Dick's stirrup, and then swung himself into his own saddle.
As they rode out of the yard, followed by the earl's servants, he
laid his hand suddenly on the boy's.

"Did they murder you often at that inn, Dickie?" he asked, in a voice
that made Dick start.

"Yes--I mean--no, Giles!  Do you care?"

Giles nodded.

"Then they didn't," said Dick firmly.  "And if they did, I don't care
now--I don't care,--not a rush!"

"Well," said Giles grimly, "you used to work your hands so when they
did it; and if we pass the miserable pig-sty I'm going to break the
man's neck."

Dick laughed rather unsteadily.

"No, Giles, don't let us stay.  And I'm sorry I annoyed you.  Cousin
Dorothy can't bear me to do it.  I didn't know.  I forgot."

Giles, smiling, suggested that the Lady Dorothy Byng would be
wringing her hands all this time over Dick, may be.  Her name
loosened Dick's tongue, and he began to talk of her, and her goodness
and beauty, and all she had done for him even before she had given
that terrible promise, and to save his life had given her word to
marry John Dent.

"John Dent!" said Giles, frowning.  And his horse reared, as if the
bridle had been jerked suddenly, as indeed it had.

"And how do you account for all this kindness being lavished upon
you, sir?" he asked, "seeing, as His Majesty saith, you are not
related."

Dick looked at his friend with a shade of regret or apology.

"I didn't know it was you behind His Majesty's chair last night,
Giles, or I need not have whispered.  But I thought 'twas her story,
and I--"

"Don't tell me her story, if you know it," Giles interrupted.  "But,
in one word, Dick, how would you account for it to the world?"

"'Tis her way to be good to everyone," Dick answered thoughtfully.
"And methinks she loves me--nay, I know she doth.  But mainly, I
think, 'tis because of my brother, who is dead."

"A brother, who is dead?" Giles questioned.

"Yes," said Dick.  "But--but she knew him, and she hath never
forgotten him, Giles."

They rode on, and though Giles was silent he listened to Dick's talk,
still of his Cousin Dorothy, and of his life with her, and of Philip,
and Bridget, and Lorry, and everything else.  They passed the Seven
Thorns without Giles noticing it.  His eyes were fixed on the
horizon, where road and sky were meeting.  Dick was glad he did not
stay, for he was in haste to be home now.  Who knew what might be
happening?  Things might have occurred since Captain Harland reported
all well hours ago.  When they reached the brow of the hill Giles
struck in his spurs, and his horse bounded forward.  Dick's pony put
out all its strength and stretched its diminutive legs, but it was
quite useless; in spite of Dick's admonitions the bay shot ahead in a
few minutes, and Giles vanished round the first bend of the lane.

"It's too bad!" Dick cried.  "He'll be there first.  His horse might
want to see her as badly as I do.  Get up, Fairy!  Go on!"

Fairy did his best, and he was panting and foaming when, where the
lane broadened out before the gates, they came upon Giles talking
from his saddle to Slingsby on foot.

"Just as well, maybe," Giles was saying as they cantered up.  "John
Dent arrived before his time, Dick; and before his time has gone to
his account."

"Is he dead?" Dick gasped.

"Yes," said Giles.  "Hold my reins, Dick, will you?  I'll see him,
Slingsby."  Dismounting, he strode away with his officer, climbed the
steep bank, and disappeared.

Dick sat still, holding the reins, whilst the horses drooped their
heads and lashed at the flies with their tails.  Giles was soon back.
He sprang down into the lane lightly with a pleasant jingle of spurs
and chains and scabbard.

"There was a skirmish, Dick, which we've missed," he said.  "They
took one of his troopers, who says Dent had spies here, who saw you
ride off yesterday.  He turned up at dawn, and Slingsby caught him in
the fields over yonder.  He was killed the first of the lot.
The--the household down there seem to have heard, or seen, nothing."

"Oh, Giles, what a good thing you sent a troop overnight!  But I'm
sorry we missed the fighting," said Dick.

Giles stood thoughtfully twisting his moustache.

"But have we done all His Majesty directed, Dick?" he said at length.
"His friends have fled--they were not numerous.  He is dead; we
cannot, therefore, send him to trial."

"Is there a clergyman there?  We were to look after him, Giles, as
His Majesty particularly mentioned.  You were to find him something
to do, weren't you?  What?  My cousin once said she would try and
find a parson as tutor for me.  Giles, dear, send him away, quickly!
She might keep him for that, if not."

Giles laughed a little.

"Come along," he said absently, taking his bridle over his arm and
moving slowly towards the gate.  But he stopped when they reached the
door of the house.  "My part in the game's played, Dick.  Go you in
and tell all the news to her Ladyship.  Ask her hospitality for
Slingsby and his men.  I'll wait here."

"You'll not!" said Dick.  "You'll come in, Giles, and help tell her."

Giles shook his head gently.

"Go you in, Dickie, and tell her your tale--'tis your tale, and I
want her to hear what her waif has done for her, from himself.
Believe me, she'll like it better so.  And if you've a mind to please
me, Dick, you will say nothing of the Earl of Lumley; but you may
tell her that Giles was sent to help you--you, mind,--and that this
same Giles, stable-helper and what-not, awaits her Ladyship's
permission to enter."

"A rare jest!" said Dick, laughing.  "She will call me a little
blockhead ever to have thought you a stableman when she sees you."

"Maybe," said Giles curtly.




CHAPTER XXII

DICK'S RETURN

The Lady Dorothy Byng was in her chamber upstairs, pacing the floor,
with bent head, restlessly, and very pale indeed.  Lorry lay on the
broad step in the window-place, watching her with pathetic,
uncomprehending eyes.  She was certainly unhappy.  But why?  Was it
because, for a whole day, she had missed that frolicking Dick?  Or
was she unwell?  Oppressed by the air of misfortune around him,
whereunder no one laughed, or ran, or had their regular meals, Lorry
lifted his black nose and gave a piteous, half-strangled whine.  But
even that, he found, did not draw his lady's eyes from the oaken
floor, nor stay her pacing feet, nor bring a word from her closed
lips.  So she walked, and Lorry watched, for hours, till the sun came
hot and hotter on the dog's back and threw the devices of the
casement glass upon her Ladyship's white dress as she passed him,
splashing her with colour one minute, and leaving her to go cold and
gray into the shadow the next.

Suddenly she stopped with a start.  Lorry, growling, bounded up to
the casement and laid his nose on the sill.  How foolishly men built
their houses, he thought, for here, strain as he might, the casement
was too high for him to see round into the yard, and yet he knew it
was full of horses and men, strangers all.

"He is come!" cried her ladyship.  "Too soon.  He shall not have me
till the time!"  She was trembling now.

Lorry was too much occupied in barking, with anger and menace, to
heed her.  There were steps, running steps, in the corridor.  Someone
tried the latch.  Lorry, changing his tone with bewildering
suddenness, leapt across to the door, over-turning a stool on his
way.  He then set up such a scratching and pawing, with such frantic
leaps and such joyous, echoing barks as made her Ladyship's brain
whirl.  Above the clamour she caught Dick's shrill cries.

"Cousin Dorothy!  Open!  Open, Cousin Dorothy!  Be quick!"

Be quick!  She flew, like Lorry, unbolted her door, and, catching
Dick in her arms, went near smothering him with kisses.  Lorry's wild
efforts to be kissed also were unnoticed, and he could only find
Dick's hair and the tip of one ear, which he industriously worked at,
leaping, barking, and wagging his tail.

"He's come, Dick," her ladyship murmured.

But Dick, drawing back, and holding Lorry's head down by main force,
so that he could speak without having his mouth licked, said: "You're
safe, Cousin Dorothy--safe."

"There are men in the yard, Dick!" she said quickly.

"Our men," he said proudly.  "And--oh, dear Cousin Dorothy,--where
shall I begin?"

"Here," she said, drawing him down on the floor as she sank into a
chair.  "And you shall tell me first, Dick, you are safe--unhurt.
That you have really come back.  Lorry and I--we may as well confess
it--"

"You thought I'd run away?"

She looked down at him remorsefully.

"You must try and forgive us," she said.

"I'll forgive you," Dick cried.  "I'd forgive you anything.  And what
might you expect of a coward like me?"

She stopped him with a kiss.

"But I'll never forgive Lorry!" said Dick in a minute.  "Never!  No,
sir!  Go down!  I pointedly told you about it.  I relied on you, sir,
to make her understand,--that I did."

Lorry sighed, with every show of contrition, thrusting his nose into
his mistress's hand.

"You must pardon us both, Dick dear.  And what said you?" she asked
eagerly.  "That I was safe?"

"Yes, yes, Cousin Dorothy.  Why, John Dent is dead, and--"

And the story of his adventure followed, with many wondering,
incredulous questions from her Ladyship.  Indeed, Dick read something
more than mere amazement in her face as he related his freedoms with
the King.  She half expressed a fear that Dick had been deceived
again in some way.  But Dick patiently assured her it was true, every
word of it, and passed on to the arrangements His Majesty made, and
how he then placed the matter in the hands of Giles--Giles, who was
alive, who was there with his master,--Giles, who had come all the
way with Dick, and had managed everything so excellent well.

"Oh, don't sing me his praises!" her ladyship said, lifting her hand.
"Every particle of my appreciation is keeping for you."

"But I could have done nothing without Giles and His Majesty."

"Oh, I give you the King, Dick, and welcome!" she said.  "But I take
it as singular His Majesty should have given the affair--my affair,
when you come to reflect, Dick, and I am a lady, into the hands of a
groom.  But you say you have officers with the troops--in command of
them?  Giles, I suppose, was to wait upon you."

Dick hid his face in her dress, and shook with laughter.  The Earl of
Lumley to wait on him!

"Oh, Cousin Dorothy!" he bubbled.  He clapped his hands to his mouth
to keep himself from telling all about dear Giles.

"Why do you laugh so, Dick?" she demanded.  "Where is the occasion?
You're over-excited, my brave little knight."  She bent over him.
"Where did His Majesty kiss you, Dick?  We must keep the place
sacred, I think."

Dick raised his face with the most exasperating chuckle.

"'Tis too late for that, Cousin Dorothy.  Giles has been over the
ground several times."

Her Ladyship made a slight, laughing gesture of contempt or
annoyance, and he did not receive the proffered kiss.

Dick stood up.

"Well, Cousin Dorothy," he said slyly.  "There is that Giles, you
know, standing out there in the sun, very tired, maybe, and very hot,
and--"

"And very thirsty, no doubt," she said.  "Why did he not go in with
the rest?  You said you'd given Philip his orders to wait on them?"

"Yes, Cousin Dorothy, but Giles said he would wait outside till he
had your Ladyship's permission to enter."

"Very proper," observed her Ladyship coolly.  "Let him wait, Dick.  I
want your tale all over again.  And then my thanks are to be made,
Dickie."

But Dick looked positively frightened.

"Oh, Cousin!" he gasped, "I doubt we had better leave him no
longer,--he--he--"

"You have much too soft a heart, Dick," she said.  "Your stableman,
now--There!  Don't look so distressed.  I will do anything you wish,
Dick.  I will even go and thank this worthy man for what he has done.
And when he and the rest have all gone, and we are once more alone, I
will thank you for what you have done, Dick--for the rest of my life."

"I want no thanks," said the boy, his face growing merry again as
they went out together.

Lorry descended the first flight of shallow steps quite sedately
behind them, but with a sniff he suddenly pushed past, fell
precipitately down the next flight into the hall, and stood, stark
and stiff, glaring out at the door.

"Man on the steps!" he barked viciously.  "Strange man!  One of these
men who are hanging about here."  He raced out in a quiver of fury.

"Farewell to your Giles, Dick!" said her ladyship.  "Lorry will
devour him ere we arrive."

But when they came in sight of the steps, they beheld that eccentric
dog, Lorry, crouched and fawning at the stranger's feet.  And the
stranger was calling him a "good old lad" in an indifferent,
good-humoured way, flicking his head with his glove, which mark of
approval Lorry received with a meek thankfulness never accorded to
his lady's demanded caresses or Dick's boisterously-received
attentions.  The Cavalier had had more pity for his horse than for
himself; the bay had been sent out of the hot glaring sun, though
Giles still waited her Ladyship's permission to enter.  She halted at
the top of the steps, and her eye ran over the man, his attitude, and
his rose-coloured dress.

"Where is your Giles, Dick?" she demanded.

Before Dick had time to answer, the gentleman started and looked up.
Baring his head with one hand, and pushing Lorry out of the way with
the other, he advanced a step.

"May I come in, madam?" he asked.

Dick felt the hand he held tremble.  He glanced from one to the
other.  What was happening?  Her Ladyship caught away her hand, and
swept down the steps to Giles with a cry.  She gave him her hand and
drew him in across the hall to the parlour.  They went in, and Giles
shut the door.  Dick and Lorry looked at each other.  The boy rubbed
his eyes.  The dog pattered to the door, and pressed his nose against
the crack.  Then, looking impatiently at Dick, he said with his eyes:
"Come and open it; you know how."  But Dick shook his head doubtfully.

"Better not, old fellow," he said.  "'Tis queer; but they don't want
us."

Lorry grunted and fidgeted about, nosing the hall-floor till he came
on the glove which Giles had dropped.  Then he gave a satisfied sigh,
and lay down with his treasure between his paws, and his nose on it.
By some instinct he gathered that Giles was a person to be courted, a
man not given to caressing, but a man who would love a dog, and whom
a dog must love and obey.

Dick stood irresolute, his hand playing with his sword-hilt.

"Ah, it's Giles!  'Tis all right," he said at last, and ran off to
find Philip.  Instead, he came upon young Captain Slingsby in the
dining-room, finishing a stately repast, whilst opposite sat the
clergyman who should have married her Ladyship to John Dent.  Dick
stayed to drink the King's health with them, and then coaxed Slingsby
into the garden to ask for tales about Giles.  He got what he wanted
there, for Slingsby loved no theme so well as the praises of the Earl
of Lumley, his goodness and his generosity, and his own lamentable
folly in going against his excellent advice.  They visited the
soldiers, and Dick rushed about amongst them, forgetful of everything
else, questioning, wondering, inspecting arms and accoutrements, and
thinking how fine a thing it was to be a soldier and fight for the
King.  He had no notion how time was flying until he became aware
that he was very hungry.  Slingsby had fallen asleep under a tree in
the garden, and to Dick's suggestion that he should come in and have
dinner, returned a decided negative, punctuated with yawns.

"But if you were to place a delicate dish or two under my nose, Sir
Richard," he said, just as Dick was departing, "I don't know that the
smell, were it a well-chosen smell, would absolutely turn me."

"Right you are," said Dick.  "I'll find something."

He ran off, and came back presently, staggering under a tray.

"Cold duck, sir," he observed, "with a cream and a compôte and a
bottle of something Philip calls prime."

Slingsby sat up.

"Good fortune!" he said briskly, and set to work.

"I did not find my cousin anywhere," said Dick.

"Ah!" said Slingsby, with half-closed eyes, "and where is my lord?"

"I don't know," said Dick.

He was going down the passage to Philip's room, just after dinner,
when he observed that the chapel-door was open, and that Philip and
Bridget were whispering within.  He went up to them.  There were a
great many flowers on the altar, and the clergyman was laying out his
service-books and vestments.

"What is he doing?" Dick whispered.  "There will be no service
to-day."

To his confusion, Bridget burst into tears, and unceremoniously
embraced him.

"Yes, yes, my little sir," the good woman said, wiping her eyes.
"And it's yourself will wait on the groom.  And the young captain to
give her Ladyship away--God bless her!  And all to end happily after
all!"

Dick stared!  Then turned on Philip.

"She's mad," he said judicially.

"Ay," Philip agreed, laughing.  "I uphold you, sir.  But a wedding,
sir, I may tell you, will unhinge any woman's reason for the time.
And we've you, sir, to thank for it all.  'He's a hero, Philip,'
saith her Ladyship but a minute since.  And--'Yes, my Lady,' say I.
That being so, sir, may I make so bold as to ask your honour to shake
hands with me, and may we be the first very heartily to congratulate
your honour?"

"You're mad, too," said Dick, his eyes round with amazement.
"Where's my Lady?"  He darted away.

Bridget said: "God bless him, the pretty lamb!"

"Lamb!" said Philip contemptuously.  "Lamb, quotha?  Lion, more
likely--brave little lion, I tell thee.  Away with you!  You an' your
lambs!"




CHAPTER XXIII

HER LADYSHIP FINISHES HER STORY

Dick, racing down the passage, ran up against Giles.

"Where's my cousin?" he cried.  "Everybody's mad!"

"Are you bitten?" Giles enquired.  "Your cousin is asking for you,
and I have been hunting you this half-hour."

He pushed Dick into the oak parlour, and sauntered away himself.

"Oh, Dick, dear," cried her Ladyship, "what a hot, tangled,
dishevelled young gallant!  Come here to me at once, sir!  I've
something to say."

The sight of his cousin, sitting by the casement in her white dress,
calmed Dick.  He had thought her on her birthday night most
beautiful, but her loveliness at this moment filled him with a kind
of awe.

He flung himself down on the window-seat.

"Bridget said--" he began.

"Oh, never mind Bridget!" said her Ladyship.  "I have a great deal to
say, Dick.  Do you know this?"

She laid in his hand two halves of a gold coin, each attached to a
silken cord.

"Giles's token!" Dick cried.  "The one I gave His Majesty at Lumley."

"Yes, and 'tis a coin, Dick, of Scotland, and called a
'bonnet-piece'."

Dick was in no mood to be interested in coins.

"'Twas Giles's," he observed; "and Bridget--"

"Listen, Dick," she entreated.  "This piece once belonged to a boy I
knew.  'Twas his chief treasure, and he broke it in two to give half
to a little maid for a keepsake.  When they were older she gave it
him back, but in anger, Dick, and misunderstanding.  And then he
wanted to--  He was a very foolish man, Dick; he thought no one was
like her, and that she hated him, so he would destroy himself.  But
he had a master who loved him, and he took from him the half that had
belonged to the maid, and he bound the man to him by an oath, to
live, and go away and forget the woman if he could; but for his sake
to keep his oath and live.  A year after 'twas said the man was dead.
But he was only in prison, Dick, and he escaped.  His master knew he
was living, but no one besides, till, his master having need of him,
he came home."

Dick was sitting before her, attentive, grave, wide-eyed.

"His master made him an earl, Dick, on condition that another title
he possessed should go to his younger brother, who had used it
believing 'twas his of right.  His Majesty said: 'As Sir Richard
Chester he held Dent, and as Sir Richard Chester he shall be known.'"

But Dick stopped her, catching her hand.

"Cousin Dorothy!  No matter for that title.  Was it Giles?"

She nodded.

"Who was it your Dorothy insulted in her father's hall years ago,
Dick, thinking he'd killed her brother?"

"Was it--was it Giles?"

"Giles!" she said.  "Ah, Dick! how could you be so deceived?  A
stableman!  How could you, Dick?  And how could you let me leave him
at my door like that?  Your brother Reginald, and--and he has never
forgotten, Dick."

But Dick was scarcely heeding now.

"There is so much to think of," she went on rapidly.  "But Reginald
will have us wedded to-day.  And why should I keep him waiting?  We
have wasted so many years."  A tear fell on her hand, but she wiped
it hastily away.  "Will you have me for a sister, Dick," she said.

Dick did not answer.  He was experiencing a real difficulty in
sorting and understanding his own feelings.  Giles!  Giles whom he
had lorded over, flouted, struck, at Dent, his brother!  That he
should be a great lord had seemed sufficiently astounding yesterday.
Giles the stableman, Giles the courtier, the unapproachable presence
amongst roisterers and revellers, the man to be obeyed, the friend,
the companion--his brother!  A quite strange conviction of his own
unworthiness came over Dick.  He turned his eyes solemnly on her
Ladyship, and sighed.

"Dick!" she cried.  "What is it?  Are you not glad, proud, to be his
brother?"

"All that," said Dick shortly.  "What of him?"

"What of him?"

"Ay.  Is he glad?  Is he proud?" the boy demanded, with a strong
likeness to his brother in his manner.

She kissed him.

"Go and ask him," she said, smiling.  "He's in the garden waiting.
To be sure, he's glad."

"But he never told me," Dick said doubtfully.  "Why not, then?
Because he was ashamed of me."  His cheeks burned.  "Think of me by
him!  Think how I treated him at Dent!  And what I was at the inn!"

"Dick!" she exclaimed.  Then, laughing a little, very softly: "Oh,
you amazing creatures!" she said.  "Why, think you, did Reginald
never let me know he lived?  Ah, because he thought I did not care!
Why did he not tell you he was your brother?  Because he thought you
would not love him, forsooth!  Why cannot you believe him glad to
have you?  Lest he deem you unworthy.  Your audacities shock terribly
one moment, and these sudden attacks of modesty are, let me tell you,
confusing.  Dick, go and find him.  You are indeed just worthy of
each other--a pair of stiff-necked, provoking, adorable beings!"

Dick moved to the door, hesitating still.  Could it be true?  Was
Giles really his brother, and was he to claim affection by right, and
be no longer a waif and a stray?  Her Ladyship followed him, and
stood at the foot of the stairs, swinging the gold tokens by their
silken cords.

"You might have said 'Yes', when I was bold enough to offer myself as
your sister," she said.  "Reginald tells me 'twas His Majesty's wish.
You would not question his wish, Dickie.  You are going to him day
after to-morrow, I may tell you.  But what must I do if you will not
have me for--"

But he flew at her, and the sentence was never completed.  Then he
ran down the steps, murmuring busily:

"My brother Reginald!  My brother Reginald!  But 'tis sad to say
Giles no more!"

The Earl of Lumley was sitting on the grass where it sloped steeply
to the banks of a little stream in the garden.  Lorry lay by his
side, beating the turf with his tail.  They both heard Dick coming,
and got up.

"A body," Giles observed, "launched down an inclined plane, Lorry,
will gather force as it travels.  The steeper the plane the greater
the impact when such a body, so travelling, comes home.
Therefore"--he set his feet apart, and extended his arms--"My boy!"

Dick had come home with impact sufficient, it seemed, to shake the
earl slightly, and to make his eyes dim for a moment, and his voice
break.

"Well," he said at last, "hath she told you all, Dickie?"

"Yes--Reginald."

"Not that, sir," said the earl, frowning.

"My--my lord?" Dick questioned, faltering a little.

"Heavens, no!  I thank you, brother."

"Then Giles!" Dick cried, with a triumphant and comfortable sense of
previous acquaintanceship and security.

"That's it, little Captain," said Giles, when his breath returned
after Dick's second onset, and Lorry's wild efforts to be received
also.  "Giles for you, if for no one else, Dick.  And now shall we
find--"

"My sister Dorothy," said Dick.

"By all means," said Giles.

And together, followed by Lorry, they went back to the house.











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DICK CHESTER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Moby Dick; Or, The Whale
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Moby Dick; Or, The Whale

Author: Herman Melville

Release date: July 1, 2001 [eBook #2701]
                Most recently updated: January 19, 2025

Language: English

Credits: Daniel Lazarus, Jonesey, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOBY DICK; OR, THE WHALE ***




MOBY-DICK;

or, THE WHALE.

By Herman Melville



CONTENTS

ETYMOLOGY.

EXTRACTS (Supplied by a Sub-Sub-Librarian).

CHAPTER 1. Loomings.

CHAPTER 2. The Carpet-Bag.

CHAPTER 3. The Spouter-Inn.

CHAPTER 4. The Counterpane.

CHAPTER 5. Breakfast.

CHAPTER 6. The Street.

CHAPTER 7. The Chapel.

CHAPTER 8. The Pulpit.

CHAPTER 9. The Sermon.

CHAPTER 10. A Bosom Friend.

CHAPTER 11. Nightgown.

CHAPTER 12. Biographical.

CHAPTER 13. Wheelbarrow.

CHAPTER 14. Nantucket.

CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

CHAPTER 17. The Ramadan.

CHAPTER 18. His Mark.

CHAPTER 19. The Prophet.

CHAPTER 20. All Astir.

CHAPTER 21. Going Aboard.

CHAPTER 22. Merry Christmas.

CHAPTER 23. The Lee Shore.

CHAPTER 24. The Advocate.

CHAPTER 25. Postscript.

CHAPTER 26. Knights and Squires.

CHAPTER 27. Knights and Squires.

CHAPTER 28. Ahab.

CHAPTER 29. Enter Ahab; to Him, Stubb.

CHAPTER 30. The Pipe.

CHAPTER 31. Queen Mab.

CHAPTER 32. Cetology.

CHAPTER 33. The Specksnyder.

CHAPTER 34. The Cabin-Table.

CHAPTER 35. The Mast-Head.

CHAPTER 36. The Quarter-Deck.

CHAPTER 37. Sunset.

CHAPTER 38. Dusk.

CHAPTER 39. First Night-Watch.

CHAPTER 40. Midnight, Forecastle.

CHAPTER 41. Moby Dick.

CHAPTER 42. The Whiteness of the Whale.

CHAPTER 43. Hark!

CHAPTER 44. The Chart.

CHAPTER 45. The Affidavit.

CHAPTER 46. Surmises.

CHAPTER 47. The Mat-Maker.

CHAPTER 48. The First Lowering.

CHAPTER 49. The Hyena.

CHAPTER 50. Ahab’s Boat and Crew. Fedallah.

CHAPTER 51. The Spirit-Spout.

CHAPTER 52. The Albatross.

CHAPTER 53. The Gam.

CHAPTER 54. The Town-Ho’s Story.

CHAPTER 55. Of the Monstrous Pictures of Whales.

CHAPTER 56. Of the Less Erroneous Pictures of Whales, and the True
Pictures of Whaling Scenes.

CHAPTER 57. Of Whales in Paint; in Teeth; in Wood; in Sheet-Iron; in
Stone; in Mountains; in Stars.

CHAPTER 58. Brit.

CHAPTER 59. Squid.

CHAPTER 60. The Line.

CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Supper.

CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

CHAPTER 66. The Shark Massacre.

CHAPTER 67. Cutting In.

CHAPTER 68. The Blanket.

CHAPTER 69. The Funeral.

CHAPTER 70. The Sphynx.

CHAPTER 71. The Jeroboam’s Story.

CHAPTER 72. The Monkey-Rope.

CHAPTER 73. Stubb and Flask kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk
over Him.

CHAPTER 74. The Sperm Whale’s Head—Contrasted View.

CHAPTER 75. The Right Whale’s Head—Contrasted View.

CHAPTER 76. The Battering-Ram.

CHAPTER 77. The Great Heidelburgh Tun.

CHAPTER 78. Cistern and Buckets.

CHAPTER 79. The Prairie.

CHAPTER 80. The Nut.

CHAPTER 81. The Pequod Meets The Virgin.

CHAPTER 82. The Honor and Glory of Whaling.

CHAPTER 83. Jonah Historically Regarded.

CHAPTER 84. Pitchpoling.

CHAPTER 85. The Fountain.

CHAPTER 86. The Tail.

CHAPTER 87. The Grand Armada.

CHAPTER 88. Schools and Schoolmasters.

CHAPTER 89. Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish.

CHAPTER 90. Heads or Tails.

CHAPTER 91. The Pequod Meets The Rose-Bud.

CHAPTER 92. Ambergris.

CHAPTER 93. The Castaway.

CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

CHAPTER 101. The Decanter.

CHAPTER 102. A Bower in the Arsacides.

CHAPTER 103. Measurement of The Whale’s Skeleton.

CHAPTER 104. The Fossil Whale.

CHAPTER 105. Does the Whale’s Magnitude Diminish?—Will He Perish?

CHAPTER 106. Ahab’s Leg.

CHAPTER 107. The Carpenter.

CHAPTER 108. Ahab and the Carpenter.

CHAPTER 109. Ahab and Starbuck in the Cabin.

CHAPTER 110. Queequeg in His Coffin.

CHAPTER 111. The Pacific.

CHAPTER 112. The Blacksmith.

CHAPTER 113. The Forge.

CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

CHAPTER 131. The Pequod Meets The Delight.

CHAPTER 132. The Symphony.

CHAPTER 133. The Chase—First Day.

CHAPTER 134. The Chase—Second Day.

CHAPTER 135. The Chase.—Third Day.

Epilogue




Original Transcriber’s Notes:





This text is a combination of etexts, one from the now-defunct ERIS
project at Virginia Tech and one from Project Gutenberg’s archives. The
proofreaders of this version are indebted to The University of Adelaide
Library for preserving the Virginia Tech version. The resulting etext
was compared with a public domain hard copy version of the text.





  ETYMOLOGY.


  (Supplied by a Late Consumptive Usher to a Grammar School.)

  The pale Usher—threadbare in coat, heart, body, and brain; I see him
  now. He was ever dusting his old lexicons and grammars, with a queer
  handkerchief, mockingly embellished with all the gay flags of all the
  known nations of the world. He loved to dust his old grammars; it
  somehow mildly reminded him of his mortality.

  “While you take in hand to school others, and to teach them by what
  name a whale-fish is to be called in our tongue, leaving out, through
  ignorance, the letter H, which almost alone maketh up the
  signification of the word, you deliver that which is not true.”
  —_Hackluyt._

  “WHALE. * * * Sw. and Dan. _hval_. This animal is named from
  roundness or rolling; for in Dan. _hvalt_ is arched or vaulted.”
  —_Webster’s Dictionary._

  “WHALE. * * * It is more immediately from the Dut. and Ger. _Wallen_;
  A.S. _Walw-ian_, to roll, to wallow.” —_Richardson’s Dictionary._


  חו,                 _Hebrew_.
  ϰητος,              _Greek_.
  CETUS,              _Latin_.
  WHŒL,               _Anglo-Saxon_.
  HVALT,              _Danish_.
  WAL,                _Dutch_.
  HWAL,               _Swedish_.
  WHALE,              _Icelandic_.
  WHALE,              _English_.
  BALLENA,            _Spanish_.
  PEKEE-NUEE-NUEE,    _Fegee_.
  PEHEE-NUEE-NUEE,    _Erromangoan_.



  EXTRACTS. (Supplied by a Sub-Sub-Librarian).



  It will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and grub-worm of
  a poor devil of a Sub-Sub appears to have gone through the long
  Vaticans and street-stalls of the earth, picking up whatever random
  allusions to whales he could anyways find in any book whatsoever,
  sacred or profane. Therefore you must not, in every case at least,
  take the higgledy-piggledy whale statements, however authentic, in
  these extracts, for veritable gospel cetology. Far from it. As
  touching the ancient authors generally, as well as the poets here
  appearing, these extracts are solely valuable or entertaining, as
  affording a glancing bird’s eye view of what has been promiscuously
  said, thought, fancied, and sung of Leviathan, by many nations and
  generations, including our own.

  So fare thee well, poor devil of a Sub-Sub, whose commentator I am.
  Thou belongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe which no wine of this
  world will ever warm; and for whom even Pale Sherry would be too
  rosy-strong; but with whom one sometimes loves to sit, and feel
  poor-devilish, too; and grow convivial upon tears; and say to them
  bluntly, with full eyes and empty glasses, and in not altogether
  unpleasant sadness—Give it up, Sub-Subs! For by how much the more
  pains ye take to please the world, by so much the more shall ye for
  ever go thankless! Would that I could clear out Hampton Court and the
  Tuileries for ye! But gulp down your tears and hie aloft to the
  royal-mast with your hearts; for your friends who have gone before
  are clearing out the seven-storied heavens, and making refugees of
  long-pampered Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael, against your coming.
  Here ye strike but splintered hearts together—there, ye shall strike
  unsplinterable glasses!

EXTRACTS.

  “And God created great whales.” —_Genesis_.

  “Leviathan maketh a path to shine after him; One would think the deep
  to be hoary.” —_Job_.

  “Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.”
  —_Jonah_.

  “There go the ships; there is that Leviathan whom thou hast made to
  play therein.” —_Psalms_.

  “In that day, the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong sword,
  shall punish Leviathan the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that
  crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.”
  —_Isaiah_.

  “And what thing soever besides cometh within the chaos of this
  monster’s mouth, be it beast, boat, or stone, down it goes all
  incontinently that foul great swallow of his, and perisheth in the
  bottomless gulf of his paunch.” —_Holland’s Plutarch’s Morals_.

  “The Indian Sea breedeth the most and the biggest fishes that are:
  among which the Whales and Whirlpooles called Balaene, take up as
  much in length as four acres or arpens of land.” —_Holland’s Pliny_.

  “Scarcely had we proceeded two days on the sea, when about sunrise a
  great many Whales and other monsters of the sea, appeared. Among the
  former, one was of a most monstrous size.... This came towards us,
  open-mouthed, raising the waves on all sides, and beating the sea
  before him into a foam.” —_Tooke’s Lucian_. “_The True History_.”




  “He visited this country also with a view of catching horse-whales,
  which had bones of very great value for their teeth, of which he
  brought some to the king.... The best whales were catched in his own
  country, of which some were forty-eight, some fifty yards long. He
  said that he was one of six who had killed sixty in two days.”
  —_Other or Other’s verbal narrative taken down from his mouth by King
  Alfred, A.D._ 890.

  “And whereas all the other things, whether beast or vessel, that
  enter into the dreadful gulf of this monster’s (whale’s) mouth, are
  immediately lost and swallowed up, the sea-gudgeon retires into it in
  great security, and there sleeps.” —MONTAIGNE. —_Apology for Raimond
  Sebond_.

  “Let us fly, let us fly! Old Nick take me if it is not Leviathan
  described by the noble prophet Moses in the life of patient Job.”
  —_Rabelais_.

  “This whale’s liver was two cartloads.” —_Stowe’s Annals_.

  “The great Leviathan that maketh the seas to seethe like boiling
  pan.” —_Lord Bacon’s Version of the Psalms_.

  “Touching that monstrous bulk of the whale or ork we have received
  nothing certain. They grow exceeding fat, insomuch that an incredible
  quantity of oil will be extracted out of one whale.” —_Ibid_.
  “_History of Life and Death_.”




  “The sovereignest thing on earth is parmacetti for an inward bruise.”
  —_King Henry_.

  “Very like a whale.” —_Hamlet_.


  “Which to secure, no skill of leach’s art Mote him availle, but to
  returne againe To his wound’s worker, that with lowly dart, Dinting
  his breast, had bred his restless paine, Like as the wounded whale to
  shore flies thro’ the maine.” —_The Fairie Queen_.



  “Immense as whales, the motion of whose vast bodies can in a peaceful
  calm trouble the ocean till it boil.” —_Sir William Davenant. Preface
  to Gondibert_.

  “What spermacetti is, men might justly doubt, since the learned
  Hosmannus in his work of thirty years, saith plainly, _Nescio quid
  sit_.” —_Sir T. Browne. Of Sperma Ceti and the Sperma Ceti Whale.
  Vide his V. E._


  “Like Spencer’s Talus with his modern flail He threatens ruin with
  his ponderous tail. ... Their fixed jav’lins in his side he wears,
  And on his back a grove of pikes appears.” —_Waller’s Battle of the
  Summer Islands_.



  “By art is created that great Leviathan, called a Commonwealth or
  State—(in Latin, Civitas) which is but an artificial man.” —_Opening
  sentence of Hobbes’s Leviathan_.

  “Silly Mansoul swallowed it without chewing, as if it had been a
  sprat in the mouth of a whale.” —_Pilgrim’s Progress_.


  “That sea beast Leviathan, which God of all his works Created hugest
  that swim the ocean stream.” —_Paradise Lost_.

  —“There Leviathan, Hugest of living creatures, in the deep Stretched
  like a promontory sleeps or swims, And seems a moving land; and at
  his gills Draws in, and at his breath spouts out a sea.” —_Ibid_.



  “The mighty whales which swim in a sea of water, and have a sea of
  oil swimming in them.” —_Fuller’s Profane and Holy State_.


  “So close behind some promontory lie The huge Leviathan to attend
  their prey, And give no chance, but swallow in the fry, Which through
  their gaping jaws mistake the way.” —_Dryden’s Annus Mirabilis_.



  “While the whale is floating at the stern of the ship, they cut off
  his head, and tow it with a boat as near the shore as it will come;
  but it will be aground in twelve or thirteen feet water.” —_Thomas
  Edge’s Ten Voyages to Spitzbergen, in Purchas_.

  “In their way they saw many whales sporting in the ocean, and in
  wantonness fuzzing up the water through their pipes and vents, which
  nature has placed on their shoulders.” —_Sir T. Herbert’s Voyages
  into Asia and Africa. Harris Coll_.

  “Here they saw such huge troops of whales, that they were forced to
  proceed with a great deal of caution for fear they should run their
  ship upon them.” —_Schouten’s Sixth Circumnavigation_.

  “We set sail from the Elbe, wind N.E. in the ship called The
  Jonas-in-the-Whale.... Some say the whale can’t open his mouth, but
  that is a fable.... They frequently climb up the masts to see whether
  they can see a whale, for the first discoverer has a ducat for his
  pains.... I was told of a whale taken near Shetland, that had above a
  barrel of herrings in his belly.... One of our harpooneers told me
  that he caught once a whale in Spitzbergen that was white all over.”
  —_A Voyage to Greenland, A.D._ 1671. _Harris Coll_.

  “Several whales have come in upon this coast (Fife) Anno 1652, one
  eighty feet in length of the whale-bone kind came in, which (as I was
  informed), besides a vast quantity of oil, did afford 500 weight of
  baleen. The jaws of it stand for a gate in the garden of Pitferren.”
  —_Sibbald’s Fife and Kinross_.

  “Myself have agreed to try whether I can master and kill this
  Sperma-ceti whale, for I could never hear of any of that sort that
  was killed by any man, such is his fierceness and swiftness.”
  —_Richard Strafford’s Letter from the Bermudas. Phil. Trans. A.D._
  1668.

  “Whales in the sea God’s voice obey.” —_N. E. Primer_.

  “We saw also abundance of large whales, there being more in those
  southern seas, as I may say, by a hundred to one; than we have to the
  northward of us.” —_Captain Cowley’s Voyage round the Globe, A.D._
  1729.

  “... and the breath of the whale is frequently attended with such an
  insupportable smell, as to bring on a disorder of the brain.”
  —_Ulloa’s South America_.


  “To fifty chosen sylphs of special note, We trust the important
  charge, the petticoat. Oft have we known that seven-fold fence to
  fail, Tho’ stuffed with hoops and armed with ribs of whale.” —_Rape
  of the Lock_.



  “If we compare land animals in respect to magnitude, with those that
  take up their abode in the deep, we shall find they will appear
  contemptible in the comparison. The whale is doubtless the largest
  animal in creation.” —_Goldsmith, Nat. Hist_.

  “If you should write a fable for little fishes, you would make them
  speak like great whales.” —_Goldsmith to Johnson_.

  “In the afternoon we saw what was supposed to be a rock, but it was
  found to be a dead whale, which some Asiatics had killed, and were
  then towing ashore. They seemed to endeavor to conceal themselves
  behind the whale, in order to avoid being seen by us.” —_Cook’s
  Voyages_.

  “The larger whales, they seldom venture to attack. They stand in so
  great dread of some of them, that when out at sea they are afraid to
  mention even their names, and carry dung, lime-stone, juniper-wood,
  and some other articles of the same nature in their boats, in order
  to terrify and prevent their too near approach.” —_Uno Von Troil’s
  Letters on Banks’s and Solander’s Voyage to Iceland in_ 1772.

  “The Spermacetti Whale found by the Nantuckois, is an active, fierce
  animal, and requires vast address and boldness in the fishermen.”
  —_Thomas Jefferson’s Whale Memorial to the French minister in_ 1778.

  “And pray, sir, what in the world is equal to it?” —_Edmund Burke’s
  reference in Parliament to the Nantucket Whale-Fishery_.

  “Spain—a great whale stranded on the shores of Europe.” —_Edmund
  Burke_. (_somewhere_.)

  “A tenth branch of the king’s ordinary revenue, said to be grounded
  on the consideration of his guarding and protecting the seas from
  pirates and robbers, is the right to _royal_ fish, which are whale
  and sturgeon. And these, when either thrown ashore or caught near the
  coast, are the property of the king.” —_Blackstone_.


  “Soon to the sport of death the crews repair: Rodmond unerring o’er
  his head suspends The barbed steel, and every turn attends.”
  —_Falconer’s Shipwreck_.

  “Bright shone the roofs, the domes, the spires, And rockets blew self
  driven, To hang their momentary fire Around the vault of heaven.

  “So fire with water to compare, The ocean serves on high, Up-spouted
  by a whale in air, To express unwieldy joy.” —_Cowper, on the Queen’s
  Visit to London_.



  “Ten or fifteen gallons of blood are thrown out of the heart at a
  stroke, with immense velocity.” —_John Hunter’s account of the
  dissection of a whale_. (_A small sized one_.)

  “The aorta of a whale is larger in the bore than the main pipe of the
  water-works at London Bridge, and the water roaring in its passage
  through that pipe is inferior in impetus and velocity to the blood
  gushing from the whale’s heart.” —_Paley’s Theology_.

  “The whale is a mammiferous animal without hind feet.” —_Baron
  Cuvier_.

  “In 40 degrees south, we saw Spermacetti Whales, but did not take any
  till the first of May, the sea being then covered with them.”
  —_Colnett’s Voyage for the Purpose of Extending the Spermaceti Whale
  Fishery_.


  “In the free element beneath me swam, Floundered and dived, in play,
  in chace, in battle, Fishes of every colour, form, and kind; Which
  language cannot paint, and mariner Had never seen; from dread
  Leviathan To insect millions peopling every wave: Gather’d in shoals
  immense, like floating islands, Led by mysterious instincts through
  that waste And trackless region, though on every side Assaulted by
  voracious enemies, Whales, sharks, and monsters, arm’d in front or
  jaw, With swords, saws, spiral horns, or hooked fangs.”
  —_Montgomery’s World before the Flood_.

  “Io!  Paean!  Io! sing. To the finny people’s king. Not a mightier
  whale than this In the vast Atlantic is; Not a fatter fish than he,
  Flounders round the Polar Sea.” —_Charles Lamb’s Triumph of the
  Whale_.



  “In the year 1690 some persons were on a high hill observing the
  whales spouting and sporting with each other, when one observed:
  there—pointing to the sea—is a green pasture where our children’s
  grand-children will go for bread.” —_Obed Macy’s History of
  Nantucket_.

  “I built a cottage for Susan and myself and made a gateway in the
  form of a Gothic Arch, by setting up a whale’s jaw bones.”
  —_Hawthorne’s Twice Told Tales_.

  “She came to bespeak a monument for her first love, who had been
  killed by a whale in the Pacific ocean, no less than forty years
  ago.” —_Ibid_.

  “No, Sir, ’tis a Right Whale,” answered Tom; “I saw his sprout; he
  threw up a pair of as pretty rainbows as a Christian would wish to
  look at. He’s a raal oil-butt, that fellow!” —_Cooper’s Pilot_.

  “The papers were brought in, and we saw in the Berlin Gazette that
  whales had been introduced on the stage there.” —_Eckermann’s
  Conversations with Goethe_.

  “My God! Mr. Chace, what is the matter?” I answered, “we have been
  stove by a whale.” —“_Narrative of the Shipwreck of the Whale Ship
  Essex of Nantucket, which was attacked and finally destroyed by a
  large Sperm Whale in the Pacific Ocean_.” _By Owen Chace of
  Nantucket, first mate of said vessel. New York_, 1821.


  “A mariner sat in the shrouds one night, The wind was piping free;
  Now bright, now dimmed, was the moonlight pale, And the phospher
  gleamed in the wake of the whale, As it floundered in the sea.”
  —_Elizabeth Oakes Smith_.



  “The quantity of line withdrawn from the boats engaged in the capture
  of this one whale, amounted altogether to 10,440 yards or nearly six
  English miles....

  “Sometimes the whale shakes its tremendous tail in the air, which,
  cracking like a whip, resounds to the distance of three or four
  miles.” —_Scoresby_.

  “Mad with the agonies he endures from these fresh attacks, the
  infuriated Sperm Whale rolls over and over; he rears his enormous
  head, and with wide expanded jaws snaps at everything around him; he
  rushes at the boats with his head; they are propelled before him with
  vast swiftness, and sometimes utterly destroyed.... It is a matter of
  great astonishment that the consideration of the habits of so
  interesting, and, in a commercial point of view, so important an
  animal (as the Sperm Whale) should have been so entirely neglected,
  or should have excited so little curiosity among the numerous, and
  many of them competent observers, that of late years, must have
  possessed the most abundant and the most convenient opportunities of
  witnessing their habitudes.” —_Thomas Beale’s History of the Sperm
  Whale_, 1839.

  “The Cachalot” (Sperm Whale) “is not only better armed than the True
  Whale” (Greenland or Right Whale) “in possessing a formidable weapon
  at either extremity of its body, but also more frequently displays a
  disposition to employ these weapons offensively and in manner at once
  so artful, bold, and mischievous, as to lead to its being regarded as
  the most dangerous to attack of all the known species of the whale
  tribe.” —_Frederick Debell Bennett’s Whaling Voyage Round the Globe_,
  1840.


  October 13.  “There she blows,” was sung out from the mast-head.
  “Where away?” demanded the captain. “Three points off the lee bow,
  sir.” “Raise up your wheel.  Steady!”  “Steady, sir.” “Mast-head
  ahoy! Do you see that whale now?” “Ay ay, sir!  A shoal of Sperm
  Whales! There she blows!  There she breaches!” “Sing out! sing out
  every time!” “Ay Ay, sir!  There she blows! there—there—_thar_ she
  blows—bowes—bo-o-os!” “How far off?” “Two miles and a half.” “Thunder
  and lightning! so near!  Call all hands.” —_J. Ross Browne’s Etchings
  of a Whaling Cruize_.  1846.



  “The Whale-ship Globe, on board of which vessel occurred the horrid
  transactions we are about to relate, belonged to the island of
  Nantucket.” —“_Narrative of the Globe Mutiny_,” _by Lay and Hussey
  survivors. A.D._ 1828.

  Being once pursued by a whale which he had wounded, he parried the
  assault for some time with a lance; but the furious monster at length
  rushed on the boat; himself and comrades only being preserved by
  leaping into the water when they saw the onset was inevitable.”
  —_Missionary Journal of Tyerman and Bennett_.

  “Nantucket itself,” said Mr. Webster, “is a very striking and
  peculiar portion of the National interest. There is a population of
  eight or nine thousand persons living here in the sea, adding largely
  every year to the National wealth by the boldest and most persevering
  industry.” —_Report of Daniel Webster’s Speech in the U. S. Senate,
  on the application for the Erection of a Breakwater at Nantucket_.
  1828.

  “The whale fell directly over him, and probably killed him in a
  moment.” —“_The Whale and his Captors, or The Whaleman’s Adventures
  and the Whale’s Biography, gathered on the Homeward Cruise of the
  Commodore Preble_.” _By Rev. Henry T. Cheever_.

  “If you make the least damn bit of noise,” replied Samuel, “I will
  send you to hell.” —_Life of Samuel Comstock_ (_the mutineer_), _by
  his brother, William Comstock. Another Version of the whale-ship
  Globe narrative_.

  “The voyages of the Dutch and English to the Northern Ocean, in
  order, if possible, to discover a passage through it to India, though
  they failed of their main object, laid-open the haunts of the whale.”
  —_McCulloch’s Commercial Dictionary_.

  “These things are reciprocal; the ball rebounds, only to bound
  forward again; for now in laying open the haunts of the whale, the
  whalemen seem to have indirectly hit upon new clews to that same
  mystic North-West Passage.” —_From_ “_Something_” _unpublished_.

  “It is impossible to meet a whale-ship on the ocean without being
  struck by her near appearance. The vessel under short sail, with
  look-outs at the mast-heads, eagerly scanning the wide expanse around
  them, has a totally different air from those engaged in regular
  voyage.” —_Currents and Whaling. U.S. Ex. Ex_.

  “Pedestrians in the vicinity of London and elsewhere may recollect
  having seen large curved bones set upright in the earth, either to
  form arches over gateways, or entrances to alcoves, and they may
  perhaps have been told that these were the ribs of whales.” —_Tales
  of a Whale Voyager to the Arctic Ocean_.

  “It was not till the boats returned from the pursuit of these whales,
  that the whites saw their ship in bloody possession of the savages
  enrolled among the crew.” —_Newspaper Account of the Taking and
  Retaking of the Whale-Ship Hobomack_.

  “It is generally well known that out of the crews of Whaling vessels
  (American) few ever return in the ships on board of which they
  departed.” —_Cruise in a Whale Boat_.

  “Suddenly a mighty mass emerged from the water, and shot up
  perpendicularly into the air. It was the whale.” —_Miriam Coffin or
  the Whale Fisherman_.

  “The Whale is harpooned to be sure; but bethink you, how you would
  manage a powerful unbroken colt, with the mere appliance of a rope
  tied to the root of his tail.” —_A Chapter on Whaling in Ribs and
  Trucks_.

  “On one occasion I saw two of these monsters (whales) probably male
  and female, slowly swimming, one after the other, within less than a
  stone’s throw of the shore” (Terra Del Fuego), “over which the beech
  tree extended its branches.” —_Darwin’s Voyage of a Naturalist_.

  “‘Stern all!’ exclaimed the mate, as upon turning his head, he saw
  the distended jaws of a large Sperm Whale close to the head of the
  boat, threatening it with instant destruction;—‘Stern all, for your
  lives!’” —_Wharton the Whale Killer_.

  “So be cheery, my lads, let your hearts never fail, While the bold
  harpooneer is striking the whale!” —_Nantucket Song_.


  “Oh, the rare old Whale, mid storm and gale In his ocean home will be
  A giant in might, where might is right, And King of the boundless
  sea.” —_Whale Song_.





CHAPTER 1. Loomings.

Call me Ishmael. Some years ago—never mind how long precisely—having
little or no money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me
on shore, I thought I would sail about a little and see the watery part
of the world. It is a way I have of driving off the spleen and
regulating the circulation. Whenever I find myself growing grim about
the mouth; whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever
I find myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and
bringing up the rear of every funeral I meet; and especially whenever
my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral
principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street, and
methodically knocking people’s hats off—then, I account it high time to
get to sea as soon as I can. This is my substitute for pistol and ball.
With a philosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword; I
quietly take to the ship. There is nothing surprising in this. If they
but knew it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other,
cherish very nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me.

There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round by
wharves as Indian isles by coral reefs—commerce surrounds it with her
surf. Right and left, the streets take you waterward. Its extreme
downtown is the battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, and
cooled by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of sight of
land. Look at the crowds of water-gazers there.

Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon. Go from Corlears
Hook to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Whitehall, northward. What
do you see?—Posted like silent sentinels all around the town, stand
thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries. Some
leaning against the spiles; some seated upon the pier-heads; some
looking over the bulwarks of ships from China; some high aloft in the
rigging, as if striving to get a still better seaward peep. But these
are all landsmen; of week days pent up in lath and plaster—tied to
counters, nailed to benches, clinched to desks. How then is this? Are
the green fields gone? What do they here?

But look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and
seemingly bound for a dive. Strange! Nothing will content them but the
extremest limit of the land; loitering under the shady lee of yonder
warehouses will not suffice. No. They must get just as nigh the water
as they possibly can without falling in. And there they stand—miles of
them—leagues. Inlanders all, they come from lanes and alleys, streets
and avenues—north, east, south, and west. Yet here they all unite. Tell
me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the compasses of all
those ships attract them thither?

Once more. Say you are in the country; in some high land of lakes. Take
almost any path you please, and ten to one it carries you down in a
dale, and leaves you there by a pool in the stream. There is magic in
it. Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his deepest
reveries—stand that man on his legs, set his feet a-going, and he will
infallibly lead you to water, if water there be in all that region.
Should you ever be athirst in the great American desert, try this
experiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysical
professor. Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are wedded for
ever.

But here is an artist. He desires to paint you the dreamiest, shadiest,
quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley
of the Saco. What is the chief element he employs? There stand his
trees, each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a crucifix were
within; and here sleeps his meadow, and there sleep his cattle; and up
from yonder cottage goes a sleepy smoke. Deep into distant woodlands
winds a mazy way, reaching to overlapping spurs of mountains bathed in
their hill-side blue. But though the picture lies thus tranced, and
though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon this
shepherd’s head, yet all were vain, unless the shepherd’s eye were
fixed upon the magic stream before him. Go visit the Prairies in June,
when for scores on scores of miles you wade knee-deep among
Tiger-lilies—what is the one charm wanting?—Water—there is not a drop
of water there! Were Niagara but a cataract of sand, would you travel
your thousand miles to see it? Why did the poor poet of Tennessee, upon
suddenly receiving two handfuls of silver, deliberate whether to buy
him a coat, which he sadly needed, or invest his money in a pedestrian
trip to Rockaway Beach? Why is almost every robust healthy boy with a
robust healthy soul in him, at some time or other crazy to go to sea?
Why upon your first voyage as a passenger, did you yourself feel such a
mystical vibration, when first told that you and your ship were now out
of sight of land? Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy? Why did
the Greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove? Surely
all this is not without meaning. And still deeper the meaning of that
story of Narcissus, who because he could not grasp the tormenting, mild
image he saw in the fountain, plunged into it and was drowned. But that
same image, we ourselves see in all rivers and oceans. It is the image
of the ungraspable phantom of life; and this is the key to it all.

Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I begin
to grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of my
lungs, I do not mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea as a
passenger. For to go as a passenger you must needs have a purse, and a
purse is but a rag unless you have something in it. Besides, passengers
get sea-sick—grow quarrelsome—don’t sleep of nights—do not enjoy
themselves much, as a general thing;—no, I never go as a passenger;
nor, though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea as a
Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I abandon the glory and distinction
of such offices to those who like them. For my part, I abominate all
honorable respectable toils, trials, and tribulations of every kind
whatsoever. It is quite as much as I can do to take care of myself,
without taking care of ships, barques, brigs, schooners, and what not.
And as for going as cook,—though I confess there is considerable glory
in that, a cook being a sort of officer on ship-board—yet, somehow, I
never fancied broiling fowls;—though once broiled, judiciously
buttered, and judgmatically salted and peppered, there is no one who
will speak more respectfully, not to say reverentially, of a broiled
fowl than I will. It is out of the idolatrous dotings of the old
Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse, that you see the
mummies of those creatures in their huge bake-houses the pyramids.

No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast,
plumb down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal mast-head.
True, they rather order me about some, and make me jump from spar to
spar, like a grasshopper in a May meadow. And at first, this sort of
thing is unpleasant enough. It touches one’s sense of honor,
particularly if you come of an old established family in the land, the
Van Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or Hardicanutes. And more than all, if
just previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you have been
lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the tallest boys stand in
awe of you. The transition is a keen one, I assure you, from a
schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction of Seneca and
the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it. But even this wears off
in time.

What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a broom
and sweep down the decks? What does that indignity amount to, weighed,
I mean, in the scales of the New Testament? Do you think the archangel
Gabriel thinks anything the less of me, because I promptly and
respectfully obey that old hunks in that particular instance? Who ain’t
a slave? Tell me that. Well, then, however the old sea-captains may
order me about—however they may thump and punch me about, I have the
satisfaction of knowing that it is all right; that everybody else is
one way or other served in much the same way—either in a physical or
metaphysical point of view, that is; and so the universal thump is
passed round, and all hands should rub each other’s shoulder-blades,
and be content.

Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point of
paying me for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a single
penny that I ever heard of. On the contrary, passengers themselves must
pay. And there is all the difference in the world between paying and
being paid. The act of paying is perhaps the most uncomfortable
infliction that the two orchard thieves entailed upon us. But _being
paid_,—what will compare with it? The urbane activity with which a man
receives money is really marvellous, considering that we so earnestly
believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, and that on no
account can a monied man enter heaven. Ah! how cheerfully we consign
ourselves to perdition!

Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesome
exercise and pure air of the fore-castle deck. For as in this world,
head winds are far more prevalent than winds from astern (that is, if
you never violate the Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the
Commodore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at second hand from
the sailors on the forecastle. He thinks he breathes it first; but not
so. In much the same way do the commonalty lead their leaders in many
other things, at the same time that the leaders little suspect it. But
wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt the sea as a
merchant sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on a whaling
voyage; this the invisible police officer of the Fates, who has the
constant surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me in
some unaccountable way—he can better answer than any one else. And,
doubtless, my going on this whaling voyage, formed part of the grand
programme of Providence that was drawn up a long time ago. It came in
as a sort of brief interlude and solo between more extensive
performances. I take it that this part of the bill must have run
something like this:

“_Grand Contested Election for the Presidency of the United States._
“WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. “BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN.”

Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers, the
Fates, put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage, when
others were set down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and short
and easy parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in farces—though I
cannot tell why this was exactly; yet, now that I recall all the
circumstances, I think I can see a little into the springs and motives
which being cunningly presented to me under various disguises, induced
me to set about performing the part I did, besides cajoling me into the
delusion that it was a choice resulting from my own unbiased freewill
and discriminating judgment.

Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great whale
himself. Such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all my
curiosity. Then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his island
bulk; the undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these, with all
the attending marvels of a thousand Patagonian sights and sounds,
helped to sway me to my wish. With other men, perhaps, such things
would not have been inducements; but as for me, I am tormented with an
everlasting itch for things remote. I love to sail forbidden seas, and
land on barbarous coasts. Not ignoring what is good, I am quick to
perceive a horror, and could still be social with it—would they let
me—since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates of
the place one lodges in.

By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; the
great flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild
conceits that swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated into
my inmost soul, endless processions of the whale, and, mid most of them
all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air.


CHAPTER 2. The Carpet-Bag.

I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my
arm, and started for Cape Horn and the Pacific. Quitting the good city
of old Manhatto, I duly arrived in New Bedford. It was a Saturday night
in December. Much was I disappointed upon learning that the little
packet for Nantucket had already sailed, and that no way of reaching
that place would offer, till the following Monday.

As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop at
this same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as well
be related that I, for one, had no idea of so doing. For my mind was
made up to sail in no other than a Nantucket craft, because there was a
fine, boisterous something about everything connected with that famous
old island, which amazingly pleased me. Besides though New Bedford has
of late been gradually monopolising the business of whaling, and though
in this matter poor old Nantucket is now much behind her, yet Nantucket
was her great original—the Tyre of this Carthage;—the place where the
first dead American whale was stranded. Where else but from Nantucket
did those aboriginal whalemen, the Red-Men, first sally out in canoes
to give chase to the Leviathan? And where but from Nantucket, too, did
that first adventurous little sloop put forth, partly laden with
imported cobblestones—so goes the story—to throw at the whales, in
order to discover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon from the
bowsprit?

Now having a night, a day, and still another night following before me
in New Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port, it became a
matter of concernment where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile. It was a
very dubious-looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, bitingly cold
and cheerless. I knew no one in the place. With anxious grapnels I had
sounded my pocket, and only brought up a few pieces of silver,—So,
wherever you go, Ishmael, said I to myself, as I stood in the middle of
a dreary street shouldering my bag, and comparing the gloom towards the
north with the darkness towards the south—wherever in your wisdom you
may conclude to lodge for the night, my dear Ishmael, be sure to
inquire the price, and don’t be too particular.

With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of “The
Crossed Harpoons”—but it looked too expensive and jolly there. Further
on, from the bright red windows of the “Sword-Fish Inn,” there came
such fervent rays, that it seemed to have melted the packed snow and
ice from before the house, for everywhere else the congealed frost lay
ten inches thick in a hard, asphaltic pavement,—rather weary for me,
when I struck my foot against the flinty projections, because from
hard, remorseless service the soles of my boots were in a most
miserable plight. Too expensive and jolly, again thought I, pausing one
moment to watch the broad glare in the street, and hear the sounds of
the tinkling glasses within. But go on, Ishmael, said I at last; don’t
you hear? get away from before the door; your patched boots are
stopping the way. So on I went. I now by instinct followed the streets
that took me waterward, for there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if not
the cheeriest inns.

Such dreary streets! blocks of blackness, not houses, on either hand,
and here and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a tomb. At
this hour of the night, of the last day of the week, that quarter of
the town proved all but deserted. But presently I came to a smoky light
proceeding from a low, wide building, the door of which stood
invitingly open. It had a careless look, as if it were meant for the
uses of the public; so, entering, the first thing I did was to stumble
over an ash-box in the porch. Ha! thought I, ha, as the flying
particles almost choked me, are these ashes from that destroyed city,
Gomorrah? But “The Crossed Harpoons,” and “The Sword-Fish?”—this, then
must needs be the sign of “The Trap.” However, I picked myself up and
hearing a loud voice within, pushed on and opened a second, interior
door.

It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet. A hundred black
faces turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond, a black Angel of
Doom was beating a book in a pulpit. It was a negro church; and the
preacher’s text was about the blackness of darkness, and the weeping
and wailing and teeth-gnashing there. Ha, Ishmael, muttered I, backing
out, Wretched entertainment at the sign of ‘The Trap!’

Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the
docks, and heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw a
swinging sign over the door with a white painting upon it, faintly
representing a tall straight jet of misty spray, and these words
underneath—“The Spouter Inn:—Peter Coffin.”

Coffin?—Spouter?—Rather ominous in that particular connexion, thought
I. But it is a common name in Nantucket, they say, and I suppose this
Peter here is an emigrant from there. As the light looked so dim, and
the place, for the time, looked quiet enough, and the dilapidated
little wooden house itself looked as if it might have been carted here
from the ruins of some burnt district, and as the swinging sign had a
poverty-stricken sort of creak to it, I thought that here was the very
spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea coffee.

It was a queer sort of place—a gable-ended old house, one side palsied
as it were, and leaning over sadly. It stood on a sharp bleak corner,
where that tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up a worse howling than
ever it did about poor Paul’s tossed craft. Euroclydon, nevertheless,
is a mighty pleasant zephyr to any one in-doors, with his feet on the
hob quietly toasting for bed. “In judging of that tempestuous wind
called Euroclydon,” says an old writer—of whose works I possess the
only copy extant—“it maketh a marvellous difference, whether thou
lookest out at it from a glass window where the frost is all on the
outside, or whether thou observest it from that sashless window, where
the frost is on both sides, and of which the wight Death is the only
glazier.” True enough, thought I, as this passage occurred to my
mind—old black-letter, thou reasonest well. Yes, these eyes are
windows, and this body of mine is the house. What a pity they didn’t
stop up the chinks and the crannies though, and thrust in a little lint
here and there. But it’s too late to make any improvements now. The
universe is finished; the copestone is on, and the chips were carted
off a million years ago. Poor Lazarus there, chattering his teeth
against the curbstone for his pillow, and shaking off his tatters with
his shiverings, he might plug up both ears with rags, and put a
corn-cob into his mouth, and yet that would not keep out the
tempestuous Euroclydon. Euroclydon! says old Dives, in his red silken
wrapper—(he had a redder one afterwards) pooh, pooh! What a fine frosty
night; how Orion glitters; what northern lights! Let them talk of their
oriental summer climes of everlasting conservatories; give me the
privilege of making my own summer with my own coals.

But what thinks Lazarus? Can he warm his blue hands by holding them up
to the grand northern lights? Would not Lazarus rather be in Sumatra
than here? Would he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along the
line of the equator; yea, ye gods! go down to the fiery pit itself, in
order to keep out this frost?

Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before the
door of Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should be
moored to one of the Moluccas. Yet Dives himself, he too lives like a
Czar in an ice palace made of frozen sighs, and being a president of a
temperance society, he only drinks the tepid tears of orphans.

But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and there
is plenty of that yet to come. Let us scrape the ice from our frosted
feet, and see what sort of a place this “Spouter” may be.


CHAPTER 3. The Spouter-Inn.

Entering that gable-ended Spouter-Inn, you found yourself in a wide,
low, straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots, reminding one of
the bulwarks of some condemned old craft. On one side hung a very large
oilpainting so thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced, that in the
unequal crosslights by which you viewed it, it was only by diligent
study and a series of systematic visits to it, and careful inquiry of
the neighbors, that you could any way arrive at an understanding of its
purpose. Such unaccountable masses of shades and shadows, that at first
you almost thought some ambitious young artist, in the time of the New
England hags, had endeavored to delineate chaos bewitched. But by dint
of much and earnest contemplation, and oft repeated ponderings, and
especially by throwing open the little window towards the back of the
entry, you at last come to the conclusion that such an idea, however
wild, might not be altogether unwarranted.

But what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber,
portentous, black mass of something hovering in the centre of the
picture over three blue, dim, perpendicular lines floating in a
nameless yeast. A boggy, soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough to drive
a nervous man distracted. Yet was there a sort of indefinite,
half-attained, unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly froze you to
it, till you involuntarily took an oath with yourself to find out what
that marvellous painting meant. Ever and anon a bright, but, alas,
deceptive idea would dart you through.—It’s the Black Sea in a midnight
gale.—It’s the unnatural combat of the four primal elements.—It’s a
blasted heath.—It’s a Hyperborean winter scene.—It’s the breaking-up of
the icebound stream of Time. But at last all these fancies yielded to
that one portentous something in the picture’s midst. _That_ once found
out, and all the rest were plain. But stop; does it not bear a faint
resemblance to a gigantic fish? even the great leviathan himself?

In fact, the artist’s design seemed this: a final theory of my own,
partly based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons with
whom I conversed upon the subject. The picture represents a Cape-Horner
in a great hurricane; the half-foundered ship weltering there with its
three dismantled masts alone visible; and an exasperated whale,
purposing to spring clean over the craft, is in the enormous act of
impaling himself upon the three mast-heads.

The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenish
array of monstrous clubs and spears. Some were thickly set with
glittering teeth resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knots
of human hair; and one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping
round like the segment made in the new-mown grass by a long-armed
mower. You shuddered as you gazed, and wondered what monstrous cannibal
and savage could ever have gone a death-harvesting with such a hacking,
horrifying implement. Mixed with these were rusty old whaling lances
and harpoons all broken and deformed. Some were storied weapons. With
this once long lance, now wildly elbowed, fifty years ago did Nathan
Swain kill fifteen whales between a sunrise and a sunset. And that
harpoon—so like a corkscrew now—was flung in Javan seas, and run away
with by a whale, years afterwards slain off the Cape of Blanco. The
original iron entered nigh the tail, and, like a restless needle
sojourning in the body of a man, travelled full forty feet, and at last
was found imbedded in the hump.

Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way—cut
through what in old times must have been a great central chimney with
fireplaces all round—you enter the public room. A still duskier place
is this, with such low ponderous beams above, and such old wrinkled
planks beneath, that you would almost fancy you trod some old craft’s
cockpits, especially of such a howling night, when this corner-anchored
old ark rocked so furiously. On one side stood a long, low, shelf-like
table covered with cracked glass cases, filled with dusty rarities
gathered from this wide world’s remotest nooks. Projecting from the
further angle of the room stands a dark-looking den—the bar—a rude
attempt at a right whale’s head. Be that how it may, there stands the
vast arched bone of the whale’s jaw, so wide, a coach might almost
drive beneath it. Within are shabby shelves, ranged round with old
decanters, bottles, flasks; and in those jaws of swift destruction,
like another cursed Jonah (by which name indeed they called him),
bustles a little withered old man, who, for their money, dearly sells
the sailors deliriums and death.

Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison. Though true
cylinders without—within, the villanous green goggling glasses
deceitfully tapered downwards to a cheating bottom. Parallel meridians
rudely pecked into the glass, surround these footpads’ goblets. Fill to
_this_ mark, and your charge is but a penny; to _this_ a penny more;
and so on to the full glass—the Cape Horn measure, which you may gulp
down for a shilling.

Upon entering the place I found a number of young seamen gathered about
a table, examining by a dim light divers specimens of _skrimshander_. I
sought the landlord, and telling him I desired to be accommodated with
a room, received for answer that his house was full—not a bed
unoccupied. “But avast,” he added, tapping his forehead, “you haint no
objections to sharing a harpooneer’s blanket, have ye? I s’pose you are
goin’ a-whalin’, so you’d better get used to that sort of thing.”

I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if I should
ever do so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, and that
if he (the landlord) really had no other place for me, and the
harpooneer was not decidedly objectionable, why rather than wander
further about a strange town on so bitter a night, I would put up with
the half of any decent man’s blanket.

“I thought so. All right; take a seat. Supper?—you want supper?
Supper’ll be ready directly.”

I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on the
Battery. At one end a ruminating tar was still further adorning it with
his jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working away at the space
between his legs. He was trying his hand at a ship under full sail, but
he didn’t make much headway, I thought.

At last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in an
adjoining room. It was cold as Iceland—no fire at all—the landlord said
he couldn’t afford it. Nothing but two dismal tallow candles, each in a
winding sheet. We were fain to button up our monkey jackets, and hold
to our lips cups of scalding tea with our half frozen fingers. But the
fare was of the most substantial kind—not only meat and potatoes, but
dumplings; good heavens! dumplings for supper! One young fellow in a
green box coat, addressed himself to these dumplings in a most direful
manner.

“My boy,” said the landlord, “you’ll have the nightmare to a dead
sartainty.”

“Landlord,” I whispered, “that aint the harpooneer is it?”

“Oh, no,” said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, “the
harpooneer is a dark complexioned chap. He never eats dumplings, he
don’t—he eats nothing but steaks, and he likes ’em rare.”

“The devil he does,” says I. “Where is that harpooneer? Is he here?”

“He’ll be here afore long,” was the answer.

I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of this “dark
complexioned” harpooneer. At any rate, I made up my mind that if it so
turned out that we should sleep together, he must undress and get into
bed before I did.

Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when, knowing not
what else to do with myself, I resolved to spend the rest of the
evening as a looker on.

Presently a rioting noise was heard without. Starting up, the landlord
cried, “That’s the Grampus’s crew. I seed her reported in the offing
this morning; a three years’ voyage, and a full ship. Hurrah, boys; now
we’ll have the latest news from the Feegees.”

A tramping of sea boots was heard in the entry; the door was flung
open, and in rolled a wild set of mariners enough. Enveloped in their
shaggy watch coats, and with their heads muffled in woollen comforters,
all bedarned and ragged, and their beards stiff with icicles, they
seemed an eruption of bears from Labrador. They had just landed from
their boat, and this was the first house they entered. No wonder, then,
that they made a straight wake for the whale’s mouth—the bar—when the
wrinkled little old Jonah, there officiating, soon poured them out
brimmers all round. One complained of a bad cold in his head, upon
which Jonah mixed him a pitch-like potion of gin and molasses, which he
swore was a sovereign cure for all colds and catarrhs whatsoever, never
mind of how long standing, or whether caught off the coast of Labrador,
or on the weather side of an ice-island.

The liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it generally does even
with the arrantest topers newly landed from sea, and they began
capering about most obstreperously.

I observed, however, that one of them held somewhat aloof, and though
he seemed desirous not to spoil the hilarity of his shipmates by his
own sober face, yet upon the whole he refrained from making as much
noise as the rest. This man interested me at once; and since the
sea-gods had ordained that he should soon become my shipmate (though
but a sleeping-partner one, so far as this narrative is concerned), I
will here venture upon a little description of him. He stood full six
feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like a coffer-dam. I
have seldom seen such brawn in a man. His face was deeply brown and
burnt, making his white teeth dazzling by the contrast; while in the
deep shadows of his eyes floated some reminiscences that did not seem
to give him much joy. His voice at once announced that he was a
Southerner, and from his fine stature, I thought he must be one of
those tall mountaineers from the Alleghanian Ridge in Virginia. When
the revelry of his companions had mounted to its height, this man
slipped away unobserved, and I saw no more of him till he became my
comrade on the sea. In a few minutes, however, he was missed by his
shipmates, and being, it seems, for some reason a huge favourite with
them, they raised a cry of “Bulkington! Bulkington! where’s
Bulkington?” and darted out of the house in pursuit of him.

It was now about nine o’clock, and the room seeming almost
supernaturally quiet after these orgies, I began to congratulate myself
upon a little plan that had occurred to me just previous to the
entrance of the seamen.

No man prefers to sleep two in a bed. In fact, you would a good deal
rather not sleep with your own brother. I don’t know how it is, but
people like to be private when they are sleeping. And when it comes to
sleeping with an unknown stranger, in a strange inn, in a strange town,
and that stranger a harpooneer, then your objections indefinitely
multiply. Nor was there any earthly reason why I as a sailor should
sleep two in a bed, more than anybody else; for sailors no more sleep
two in a bed at sea, than bachelor Kings do ashore. To be sure they all
sleep together in one apartment, but you have your own hammock, and
cover yourself with your own blanket, and sleep in your own skin.

The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I abominated the
thought of sleeping with him. It was fair to presume that being a
harpooneer, his linen or woollen, as the case might be, would not be of
the tidiest, certainly none of the finest. I began to twitch all over.
Besides, it was getting late, and my decent harpooneer ought to be home
and going bedwards. Suppose now, he should tumble in upon me at
midnight—how could I tell from what vile hole he had been coming?

“Landlord! I’ve changed my mind about that harpooneer.—I shan’t sleep
with him. I’ll try the bench here.”

“Just as you please; I’m sorry I can’t spare ye a tablecloth for a
mattress, and it’s a plaguy rough board here”—feeling of the knots and
notches. “But wait a bit, Skrimshander; I’ve got a carpenter’s plane
there in the bar—wait, I say, and I’ll make ye snug enough.” So saying
he procured the plane; and with his old silk handkerchief first dusting
the bench, vigorously set to planing away at my bed, the while grinning
like an ape. The shavings flew right and left; till at last the
plane-iron came bump against an indestructible knot. The landlord was
near spraining his wrist, and I told him for heaven’s sake to quit—the
bed was soft enough to suit me, and I did not know how all the planing
in the world could make eider down of a pine plank. So gathering up the
shavings with another grin, and throwing them into the great stove in
the middle of the room, he went about his business, and left me in a
brown study.

I now took the measure of the bench, and found that it was a foot too
short; but that could be mended with a chair. But it was a foot too
narrow, and the other bench in the room was about four inches higher
than the planed one—so there was no yoking them. I then placed the
first bench lengthwise along the only clear space against the wall,
leaving a little interval between, for my back to settle down in. But I
soon found that there came such a draught of cold air over me from
under the sill of the window, that this plan would never do at all,
especially as another current from the rickety door met the one from
the window, and both together formed a series of small whirlwinds in
the immediate vicinity of the spot where I had thought to spend the
night.

The devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop, couldn’t I steal
a march on him—bolt his door inside, and jump into his bed, not to be
wakened by the most violent knockings? It seemed no bad idea; but upon
second thoughts I dismissed it. For who could tell but what the next
morning, so soon as I popped out of the room, the harpooneer might be
standing in the entry, all ready to knock me down!

Still, looking round me again, and seeing no possible chance of
spending a sufferable night unless in some other person’s bed, I began
to think that after all I might be cherishing unwarrantable prejudices
against this unknown harpooneer. Thinks I, I’ll wait awhile; he must be
dropping in before long. I’ll have a good look at him then, and perhaps
we may become jolly good bedfellows after all—there’s no telling.

But though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, and threes,
and going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer.

“Landlord!” said I, “what sort of a chap is he—does he always keep such
late hours?” It was now hard upon twelve o’clock.

The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed to be
mightily tickled at something beyond my comprehension. “No,” he
answered, “generally he’s an early bird—airley to bed and airley to
rise—yes, he’s the bird what catches the worm. But to-night he went out
a peddling, you see, and I don’t see what on airth keeps him so late,
unless, may be, he can’t sell his head.”

“Can’t sell his head?—What sort of a bamboozingly story is this you are
telling me?” getting into a towering rage. “Do you pretend to say,
landlord, that this harpooneer is actually engaged this blessed
Saturday night, or rather Sunday morning, in peddling his head around
this town?”

“That’s precisely it,” said the landlord, “and I told him he couldn’t
sell it here, the market’s overstocked.”

“With what?” shouted I.

“With heads to be sure; ain’t there too many heads in the world?”

“I tell you what it is, landlord,” said I quite calmly, “you’d better
stop spinning that yarn to me—I’m not green.”

“May be not,” taking out a stick and whittling a toothpick, “but I
rayther guess you’ll be done _brown_ if that ere harpooneer hears you a
slanderin’ his head.”

“I’ll break it for him,” said I, now flying into a passion again at
this unaccountable farrago of the landlord’s.

“It’s broke a’ready,” said he.

“Broke,” said I—“_broke_, do you mean?”

“Sartain, and that’s the very reason he can’t sell it, I guess.”

“Landlord,” said I, going up to him as cool as Mt. Hecla in a
snow-storm—“landlord, stop whittling. You and I must understand one
another, and that too without delay. I come to your house and want a
bed; you tell me you can only give me half a one; that the other half
belongs to a certain harpooneer. And about this harpooneer, whom I have
not yet seen, you persist in telling me the most mystifying and
exasperating stories tending to beget in me an uncomfortable feeling
towards the man whom you design for my bedfellow—a sort of connexion,
landlord, which is an intimate and confidential one in the highest
degree. I now demand of you to speak out and tell me who and what this
harpooneer is, and whether I shall be in all respects safe to spend the
night with him. And in the first place, you will be so good as to unsay
that story about selling his head, which if true I take to be good
evidence that this harpooneer is stark mad, and I’ve no idea of
sleeping with a madman; and you, sir, _you_ I mean, landlord, _you_,
sir, by trying to induce me to do so knowingly, would thereby render
yourself liable to a criminal prosecution.”

“Wall,” said the landlord, fetching a long breath, “that’s a purty long
sarmon for a chap that rips a little now and then. But be easy, be
easy, this here harpooneer I have been tellin’ you of has just arrived
from the south seas, where he bought up a lot of ’balmed New Zealand
heads (great curios, you know), and he’s sold all on ’em but one, and
that one he’s trying to sell to-night, cause to-morrow’s Sunday, and it
would not do to be sellin’ human heads about the streets when folks is
goin’ to churches. He wanted to, last Sunday, but I stopped him just as
he was goin’ out of the door with four heads strung on a string, for
all the airth like a string of inions.”

This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery, and showed
that the landlord, after all, had had no idea of fooling me—but at the
same time what could I think of a harpooneer who stayed out of a
Saturday night clean into the holy Sabbath, engaged in such a cannibal
business as selling the heads of dead idolators?

“Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a dangerous man.”

“He pays reg’lar,” was the rejoinder. “But come, it’s getting dreadful
late, you had better be turning flukes—it’s a nice bed; Sal and me
slept in that ere bed the night we were spliced. There’s plenty of room
for two to kick about in that bed; it’s an almighty big bed that. Why,
afore we give it up, Sal used to put our Sam and little Johnny in the
foot of it. But I got a dreaming and sprawling about one night, and
somehow, Sam got pitched on the floor, and came near breaking his arm.
Arter that, Sal said it wouldn’t do. Come along here, I’ll give ye a
glim in a jiffy;” and so saying he lighted a candle and held it towards
me, offering to lead the way. But I stood irresolute; when looking at a
clock in the corner, he exclaimed “I vum it’s Sunday—you won’t see that
harpooneer to-night; he’s come to anchor somewhere—come along then;
_do_ come; _won’t_ ye come?”

I considered the matter a moment, and then up stairs we went, and I was
ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished, sure enough,
with a prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed for any four
harpooneers to sleep abreast.

“There,” said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old sea chest
that did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table; “there, make
yourself comfortable now, and good night to ye.” I turned round from
eyeing the bed, but he had disappeared.

Folding back the counterpane, I stooped over the bed. Though none of
the most elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny tolerably well. I then
glanced round the room; and besides the bedstead and centre table,
could see no other furniture belonging to the place, but a rude shelf,
the four walls, and a papered fireboard representing a man striking a
whale. Of things not properly belonging to the room, there was a
hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the floor in one corner; also a
large seaman’s bag, containing the harpooneer’s wardrobe, no doubt in
lieu of a land trunk. Likewise, there was a parcel of outlandish bone
fish hooks on the shelf over the fire-place, and a tall harpoon
standing at the head of the bed.

But what is this on the chest? I took it up, and held it close to the
light, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible to
arrive at some satisfactory conclusion concerning it. I can compare it
to nothing but a large door mat, ornamented at the edges with little
tinkling tags something like the stained porcupine quills round an
Indian moccasin. There was a hole or slit in the middle of this mat, as
you see the same in South American ponchos. But could it be possible
that any sober harpooneer would get into a door mat, and parade the
streets of any Christian town in that sort of guise? I put it on, to
try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, being uncommonly shaggy
and thick, and I thought a little damp, as though this mysterious
harpooneer had been wearing it of a rainy day. I went up in it to a bit
of glass stuck against the wall, and I never saw such a sight in my
life. I tore myself out of it in such a hurry that I gave myself a kink
in the neck.

I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced thinking about this
head-peddling harpooneer, and his door mat. After thinking some time on
the bed-side, I got up and took off my monkey jacket, and then stood in
the middle of the room thinking. I then took off my coat, and thought a
little more in my shirt sleeves. But beginning to feel very cold now,
half undressed as I was, and remembering what the landlord said about
the harpooneer’s not coming home at all that night, it being so very
late, I made no more ado, but jumped out of my pantaloons and boots,
and then blowing out the light tumbled into bed, and commended myself
to the care of heaven.

Whether that mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crockery,
there is no telling, but I rolled about a good deal, and could not
sleep for a long time. At last I slid off into a light doze, and had
pretty nearly made a good offing towards the land of Nod, when I heard
a heavy footfall in the passage, and saw a glimmer of light come into
the room from under the door.

Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, the infernal
head-peddler. But I lay perfectly still, and resolved not to say a word
till spoken to. Holding a light in one hand, and that identical New
Zealand head in the other, the stranger entered the room, and without
looking towards the bed, placed his candle a good way off from me on
the floor in one corner, and then began working away at the knotted
cords of the large bag I before spoke of as being in the room. I was
all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted for some time
while employed in unlacing the bag’s mouth. This accomplished, however,
he turned round—when, good heavens! what a sight! Such a face! It was
of a dark, purplish, yellow colour, here and there stuck over with
large blackish looking squares. Yes, it’s just as I thought, he’s a
terrible bedfellow; he’s been in a fight, got dreadfully cut, and here
he is, just from the surgeon. But at that moment he chanced to turn his
face so towards the light, that I plainly saw they could not be
sticking-plasters at all, those black squares on his cheeks. They were
stains of some sort or other. At first I knew not what to make of this;
but soon an inkling of the truth occurred to me. I remembered a story
of a white man—a whaleman too—who, falling among the cannibals, had
been tattooed by them. I concluded that this harpooneer, in the course
of his distant voyages, must have met with a similar adventure. And
what is it, thought I, after all! It’s only his outside; a man can be
honest in any sort of skin. But then, what to make of his unearthly
complexion, that part of it, I mean, lying round about, and completely
independent of the squares of tattooing. To be sure, it might be
nothing but a good coat of tropical tanning; but I never heard of a hot
sun’s tanning a white man into a purplish yellow one. However, I had
never been in the South Seas; and perhaps the sun there produced these
extraordinary effects upon the skin. Now, while all these ideas were
passing through me like lightning, this harpooneer never noticed me at
all. But, after some difficulty having opened his bag, he commenced
fumbling in it, and presently pulled out a sort of tomahawk, and a
seal-skin wallet with the hair on. Placing these on the old chest in
the middle of the room, he then took the New Zealand head—a ghastly
thing enough—and crammed it down into the bag. He now took off his
hat—a new beaver hat—when I came nigh singing out with fresh surprise.
There was no hair on his head—none to speak of at least—nothing but a
small scalp-knot twisted up on his forehead. His bald purplish head now
looked for all the world like a mildewed skull. Had not the stranger
stood between me and the door, I would have bolted out of it quicker
than ever I bolted a dinner.

Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out of the window, but
it was the second floor back. I am no coward, but what to make of this
head-peddling purple rascal altogether passed my comprehension.
Ignorance is the parent of fear, and being completely nonplussed and
confounded about the stranger, I confess I was now as much afraid of
him as if it was the devil himself who had thus broken into my room at
the dead of night. In fact, I was so afraid of him that I was not game
enough just then to address him, and demand a satisfactory answer
concerning what seemed inexplicable in him.

Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at last showed
his chest and arms. As I live, these covered parts of him were
checkered with the same squares as his face; his back, too, was all
over the same dark squares; he seemed to have been in a Thirty Years’
War, and just escaped from it with a sticking-plaster shirt. Still
more, his very legs were marked, as if a parcel of dark green frogs
were running up the trunks of young palms. It was now quite plain that
he must be some abominable savage or other shipped aboard of a whaleman
in the South Seas, and so landed in this Christian country. I quaked to
think of it. A peddler of heads too—perhaps the heads of his own
brothers. He might take a fancy to mine—heavens! look at that tomahawk!

But there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went about
something that completely fascinated my attention, and convinced me
that he must indeed be a heathen. Going to his heavy grego, or wrapall,
or dreadnaught, which he had previously hung on a chair, he fumbled in
the pockets, and produced at length a curious little deformed image
with a hunch on its back, and exactly the colour of a three days’ old
Congo baby. Remembering the embalmed head, at first I almost thought
that this black manikin was a real baby preserved in some similar
manner. But seeing that it was not at all limber, and that it glistened
a good deal like polished ebony, I concluded that it must be nothing
but a wooden idol, which indeed it proved to be. For now the savage
goes up to the empty fire-place, and removing the papered fire-board,
sets up this little hunch-backed image, like a tenpin, between the
andirons. The chimney jambs and all the bricks inside were very sooty,
so that I thought this fire-place made a very appropriate little shrine
or chapel for his Congo idol.

I now screwed my eyes hard towards the half hidden image, feeling but
ill at ease meantime—to see what was next to follow. First he takes
about a double handful of shavings out of his grego pocket, and places
them carefully before the idol; then laying a bit of ship biscuit on
top and applying the flame from the lamp, he kindled the shavings into
a sacrificial blaze. Presently, after many hasty snatches into the
fire, and still hastier withdrawals of his fingers (whereby he seemed
to be scorching them badly), he at last succeeded in drawing out the
biscuit; then blowing off the heat and ashes a little, he made a polite
offer of it to the little negro. But the little devil did not seem to
fancy such dry sort of fare at all; he never moved his lips. All these
strange antics were accompanied by still stranger guttural noises from
the devotee, who seemed to be praying in a sing-song or else singing
some pagan psalmody or other, during which his face twitched about in
the most unnatural manner. At last extinguishing the fire, he took the
idol up very unceremoniously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket
as carelessly as if he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock.

All these queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness, and seeing
him now exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his business
operations, and jumping into bed with me, I thought it was high time,
now or never, before the light was put out, to break the spell in which
I had so long been bound.

But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal one.
Taking up his tomahawk from the table, he examined the head of it for
an instant, and then holding it to the light, with his mouth at the
handle, he puffed out great clouds of tobacco smoke. The next moment
the light was extinguished, and this wild cannibal, tomahawk between
his teeth, sprang into bed with me. I sang out, I could not help it
now; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment he began feeling me.

Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled away from him
against the wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he might
be, to keep quiet, and let me get up and light the lamp again. But his
guttural responses satisfied me at once that he but ill comprehended my
meaning.

“Who-e debel you?”—he at last said—“you no speak-e, dam-me, I kill-e.”
And so saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about me in the
dark.

“Landlord, for God’s sake, Peter Coffin!” shouted I. “Landlord! Watch!
Coffin! Angels! save me!”

“Speak-e! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e!” again growled the
cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scattered the
hot tobacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get on fire.
But thank heaven, at that moment the landlord came into the room light
in hand, and leaping from the bed I ran up to him.

“Don’t be afraid now,” said he, grinning again, “Queequeg here wouldn’t
harm a hair of your head.”

“Stop your grinning,” shouted I, “and why didn’t you tell me that that
infernal harpooneer was a cannibal?”

“I thought ye know’d it;—didn’t I tell ye, he was a peddlin’ heads
around town?—but turn flukes again and go to sleep. Queequeg, look
here—you sabbee me, I sabbee—you this man sleepe you—you sabbee?”

“Me sabbee plenty”—grunted Queequeg, puffing away at his pipe and
sitting up in bed.

“You gettee in,” he added, motioning to me with his tomahawk, and
throwing the clothes to one side. He really did this in not only a
civil but a really kind and charitable way. I stood looking at him a
moment. For all his tattooings he was on the whole a clean, comely
looking cannibal. What’s all this fuss I have been making about,
thought I to myself—the man’s a human being just as I am: he has just
as much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him. Better sleep
with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian.

“Landlord,” said I, “tell him to stash his tomahawk there, or pipe, or
whatever you call it; tell him to stop smoking, in short, and I will
turn in with him. But I don’t fancy having a man smoking in bed with
me. It’s dangerous. Besides, I ain’t insured.”

This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and again politely
motioned me to get into bed—rolling over to one side as much as to
say—“I won’t touch a leg of ye.”

“Good night, landlord,” said I, “you may go.”

I turned in, and never slept better in my life.


CHAPTER 4. The Counterpane.

Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg’s arm thrown
over me in the most loving and affectionate manner. You had almost
thought I had been his wife. The counterpane was of patchwork, full of
odd little parti-coloured squares and triangles; and this arm of his
tattooed all over with an interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure, no
two parts of which were of one precise shade—owing I suppose to his
keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in sun and shade, his shirt
sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times—this same arm of his, I
say, looked for all the world like a strip of that same patchwork
quilt. Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke, I
could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues
together; and it was only by the sense of weight and pressure that I
could tell that Queequeg was hugging me.

My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain them. When I was a
child, I well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me;
whether it was a reality or a dream, I never could entirely settle. The
circumstance was this. I had been cutting up some caper or other—I
think it was trying to crawl up the chimney, as I had seen a little
sweep do a few days previous; and my stepmother who, somehow or other,
was all the time whipping me, or sending me to bed supperless,—my
mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and packed me off to
bed, though it was only two o’clock in the afternoon of the 21st June,
the longest day in the year in our hemisphere. I felt dreadfully. But
there was no help for it, so up stairs I went to my little room in the
third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time,
and with a bitter sigh got between the sheets.

I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse
before I could hope for a resurrection. Sixteen hours in bed! the small
of my back ached to think of it. And it was so light too; the sun
shining in at the window, and a great rattling of coaches in the
streets, and the sound of gay voices all over the house. I felt worse
and worse—at last I got up, dressed, and softly going down in my
stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and suddenly threw myself at
her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to give me a good
slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning me to
lie abed such an unendurable length of time. But she was the best and
most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For
several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than
I have ever done since, even from the greatest subsequent misfortunes.
At last I must have fallen into a troubled nightmare of a doze; and
slowly waking from it—half steeped in dreams—I opened my eyes, and the
before sun-lit room was now wrapped in outer darkness. Instantly I felt
a shock running through all my frame; nothing was to be seen, and
nothing was to be heard; but a supernatural hand seemed placed in mine.
My arm hung over the counterpane, and the nameless, unimaginable,
silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged, seemed closely
seated by my bed-side. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I lay there,
frozen with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand; yet
ever thinking that if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid
spell would be broken. I knew not how this consciousness at last glided
away from me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it
all, and for days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in
confounding attempts to explain the mystery. Nay, to this very hour, I
often puzzle myself with it.

Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the
supernatural hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness, to
those which I experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg’s pagan arm
thrown round me. But at length all the past night’s events soberly
recurred, one by one, in fixed reality, and then I lay only alive to
the comical predicament. For though I tried to move his arm—unlock his
bridegroom clasp—yet, sleeping as he was, he still hugged me tightly,
as though naught but death should part us twain. I now strove to rouse
him—“Queequeg!”—but his only answer was a snore. I then rolled over, my
neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly felt a
slight scratch. Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk
sleeping by the savage’s side, as if it were a hatchet-faced baby. A
pretty pickle, truly, thought I; abed here in a strange house in the
broad day, with a cannibal and a tomahawk! “Queequeg!—in the name of
goodness, Queequeg, wake!” At length, by dint of much wriggling, and
loud and incessant expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his
hugging a fellow male in that matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in
extracting a grunt; and presently, he drew back his arm, shook himself
all over like a Newfoundland dog just from the water, and sat up in
bed, stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and rubbing his eyes as if
he did not altogether remember how I came to be there, though a dim
consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning over
him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious misgivings
now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature. When, at
last, his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow,
and he became, as it were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon
the floor, and by certain signs and sounds gave me to understand that,
if it pleased me, he would dress first and then leave me to dress
afterwards, leaving the whole apartment to myself. Thinks I, Queequeg,
under the circumstances, this is a very civilized overture; but, the
truth is, these savages have an innate sense of delicacy, say what you
will; it is marvellous how essentially polite they are. I pay this
particular compliment to Queequeg, because he treated me with so much
civility and consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness;
staring at him from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; for
the time my curiosity getting the better of my breeding. Nevertheless,
a man like Queequeg you don’t see every day, he and his ways were well
worth unusual regarding.

He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall
one, by the by, and then—still minus his trowsers—he hunted up his
boots. What under the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his
next movement was to crush himself—boots in hand, and hat on—under the
bed; when, from sundry violent gaspings and strainings, I inferred he
was hard at work booting himself; though by no law of propriety that I
ever heard of, is any man required to be private when putting on his
boots. But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature in the transition
stage—neither caterpillar nor butterfly. He was just enough civilized
to show off his outlandishness in the strangest possible manners. His
education was not yet completed. He was an undergraduate. If he had not
been a small degree civilized, he very probably would not have troubled
himself with boots at all; but then, if he had not been still a savage,
he never would have dreamt of getting under the bed to put them on. At
last, he emerged with his hat very much dented and crushed down over
his eyes, and began creaking and limping about the room, as if, not
being much accustomed to boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide
ones—probably not made to order either—rather pinched and tormented him
at the first go off of a bitter cold morning.

Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that the
street being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view
into the room, and observing more and more the indecorous figure that
Queequeg made, staving about with little else but his hat and boots on;
I begged him as well as I could, to accelerate his toilet somewhat, and
particularly to get into his pantaloons as soon as possible. He
complied, and then proceeded to wash himself. At that time in the
morning any Christian would have washed his face; but Queequeg, to my
amazement, contented himself with restricting his ablutions to his
chest, arms, and hands. He then donned his waistcoat, and taking up a
piece of hard soap on the wash-stand centre table, dipped it into water
and commenced lathering his face. I was watching to see where he kept
his razor, when lo and behold, he takes the harpoon from the bed
corner, slips out the long wooden stock, unsheathes the head, whets it
a little on his boot, and striding up to the bit of mirror against the
wall, begins a vigorous scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks.
Thinks I, Queequeg, this is using Rogers’s best cutlery with a
vengeance. Afterwards I wondered the less at this operation when I came
to know of what fine steel the head of a harpoon is made, and how
exceedingly sharp the long straight edges are always kept.

The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out of
the room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and sporting his
harpoon like a marshal’s baton.


CHAPTER 5. Breakfast.

I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted the
grinning landlord very pleasantly. I cherished no malice towards him,
though he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter of my
bedfellow.

However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a
good thing; the more’s the pity. So, if any one man, in his own proper
person, afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not be
backward, but let him cheerfully allow himself to spend and be spent in
that way. And the man that has anything bountifully laughable about
him, be sure there is more in that man than you perhaps think for.

The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in the
night previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at. They were
nearly all whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, and third mates,
and sea carpenters, and sea coopers, and sea blacksmiths, and
harpooneers, and ship keepers; a brown and brawny company, with bosky
beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all wearing monkey jackets for morning
gowns.

You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore. This
young fellow’s healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue, and
would seem to smell almost as musky; he cannot have been three days
landed from his Indian voyage. That man next him looks a few shades
lighter; you might say a touch of satin wood is in him. In the
complexion of a third still lingers a tropic tawn, but slightly
bleached withal; _he_ doubtless has tarried whole weeks ashore. But who
could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with various tints,
seemed like the Andes’ western slope, to show forth in one array,
contrasting climates, zone by zone.

“Grub, ho!” now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we
went to breakfast.

They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at ease
in manner, quite self-possessed in company. Not always, though:
Ledyard, the great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch
one; of all men, they possessed the least assurance in the parlor. But
perhaps the mere crossing of Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as
Ledyard did, or the taking a long solitary walk on an empty stomach, in
the negro heart of Africa, which was the sum of poor Mungo’s
performances—this kind of travel, I say, may not be the very best mode
of attaining a high social polish. Still, for the most part, that sort
of thing is to be had anywhere.

These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance that
after we were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear some
good stories about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly every man
maintained a profound silence. And not only that, but they looked
embarrassed. Yes, here were a set of sea-dogs, many of whom without the
slightest bashfulness had boarded great whales on the high seas—entire
strangers to them—and duelled them dead without winking; and yet, here
they sat at a social breakfast table—all of the same calling, all of
kindred tastes—looking round as sheepishly at each other as though they
had never been out of sight of some sheepfold among the Green
Mountains. A curious sight; these bashful bears, these timid warrior
whalemen!

But as for Queequeg—why, Queequeg sat there among them—at the head of
the table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle. To be sure I
cannot say much for his breeding. His greatest admirer could not have
cordially justified his bringing his harpoon into breakfast with him,
and using it there without ceremony; reaching over the table with it,
to the imminent jeopardy of many heads, and grappling the beefsteaks
towards him. But _that_ was certainly very coolly done by him, and
every one knows that in most people’s estimation, to do anything coolly
is to do it genteelly.

We will not speak of all Queequeg’s peculiarities here; how he eschewed
coffee and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to
beefsteaks, done rare. Enough, that when breakfast was over he withdrew
like the rest into the public room, lighted his tomahawk-pipe, and was
sitting there quietly digesting and smoking with his inseparable hat
on, when I sallied out for a stroll.


CHAPTER 6. The Street.

If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish
an individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of a
civilized town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my first
daylight stroll through the streets of New Bedford.

In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will
frequently offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from foreign
parts. Even in Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean mariners
will sometimes jostle the affrighted ladies. Regent Street is not
unknown to Lascars and Malays; and at Bombay, in the Apollo Green, live
Yankees have often scared the natives. But New Bedford beats all Water
Street and Wapping. In these last-mentioned haunts you see only
sailors; but in New Bedford, actual cannibals stand chatting at street
corners; savages outright; many of whom yet carry on their bones unholy
flesh. It makes a stranger stare.

But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans, Pannangians,
and Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the whaling-craft
which unheeded reel about the streets, you will see other sights still
more curious, certainly more comical. There weekly arrive in this town
scores of green Vermonters and New Hampshire men, all athirst for gain
and glory in the fishery. They are mostly young, of stalwart frames;
fellows who have felled forests, and now seek to drop the axe and
snatch the whale-lance. Many are as green as the Green Mountains whence
they came. In some things you would think them but a few hours old.
Look there! that chap strutting round the corner. He wears a beaver hat
and swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and sheath-knife.
Here comes another with a sou’-wester and a bombazine cloak.

No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one—I mean a
downright bumpkin dandy—a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow his
two acres in buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands. Now when a
country dandy like this takes it into his head to make a distinguished
reputation, and joins the great whale-fishery, you should see the
comical things he does upon reaching the seaport. In bespeaking his
sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his waistcoats; straps to his
canvas trowsers. Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly will burst those
straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven, straps,
buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.

But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals,
and bumpkins to show her visitors. Not at all. Still New Bedford is a
queer place. Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land would
this day perhaps have been in as howling condition as the coast of
Labrador. As it is, parts of her back country are enough to frighten
one, they look so bony. The town itself is perhaps the dearest place to
live in, in all New England. It is a land of oil, true enough: but not
like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine. The streets do not run
with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave them with fresh eggs.
Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America will you find more
patrician-like houses; parks and gardens more opulent, than in New
Bedford. Whence came they? how planted upon this once scraggy scoria of
a country?

Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty
mansion, and your question will be answered. Yes; all these brave
houses and flowery gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
oceans. One and all, they were harpooned and dragged up hither from the
bottom of the sea. Can Herr Alexander perform a feat like that?

In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their
daughters, and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece.
You must go to New Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they say,
they have reservoirs of oil in every house, and every night recklessly
burn their lengths in spermaceti candles.

In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples—long
avenues of green and gold. And in August, high in air, the beautiful
and bountiful horse-chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by
their tapering upright cones of congregated blossoms. So omnipotent is
art; which in many a district of New Bedford has superinduced bright
terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse rocks thrown aside at
creation’s final day.

And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses. But
roses only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of their cheeks
is perennial as sunlight in the seventh heavens. Elsewhere match that
bloom of theirs, ye cannot, save in Salem, where they tell me the young
girls breathe such musk, their sailor sweethearts smell them miles off
shore, as though they were drawing nigh the odorous Moluccas instead of
the Puritanic sands.


CHAPTER 7. The Chapel.

In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman’s Chapel, and few are
the moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or Pacific, who
fail to make a Sunday visit to the spot. I am sure that I did not.

Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this
special errand. The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to driving
sleet and mist. Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the cloth called
bearskin, I fought my way against the stubborn storm. Entering, I found
a small scattered congregation of sailors, and sailors’ wives and
widows. A muffled silence reigned, only broken at times by the shrieks
of the storm. Each silent worshipper seemed purposely sitting apart
from the other, as if each silent grief were insular and
incommunicable. The chaplain had not yet arrived; and there these
silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing several marble
tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on either side the
pulpit. Three of them ran something like the following, but I do not
pretend to quote:—

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF JOHN TALBOT, Who, at the age of eighteen, was
lost overboard, Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia, _November_
1_st_, 1836. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS SISTER.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY, NATHAN COLEMAN,
WALTER CANNY, SETH MACY, AND SAMUEL GLEIG, Forming one of the boats’
crews OF THE SHIP ELIZA Who were towed out of sight by a Whale, On the
Off-shore Ground in the PACIFIC, _December_ 31_st_, 1839. THIS MARBLE
Is here placed by their surviving SHIPMATES.

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF The late CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY, Who in the bows
of his boat was killed by a Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan, _August_
3_d_, 1833. THIS TABLET Is erected to his Memory BY HIS WIDOW.

Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated
myself near the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see
Queequeg near me. Affected by the solemnity of the scene, there was a
wondering gaze of incredulous curiosity in his countenance. This savage
was the only person present who seemed to notice my entrance; because
he was the only one who could not read, and, therefore, was not reading
those frigid inscriptions on the wall. Whether any of the relatives of
the seamen whose names appeared there were now among the congregation,
I knew not; but so many are the unrecorded accidents in the fishery,
and so plainly did several women present wear the countenance if not
the trappings of some unceasing grief, that I feel sure that here
before me were assembled those, in whose unhealing hearts the sight of
those bleak tablets sympathetically caused the old wounds to bleed
afresh.

Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing
among flowers can say—here, _here_ lies my beloved; ye know not the
desolation that broods in bosoms like these. What bitter blanks in
those black-bordered marbles which cover no ashes! What despair in
those immovable inscriptions! What deadly voids and unbidden
infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw upon all Faith, and refuse
resurrections to the beings who have placelessly perished without a
grave. As well might those tablets stand in the cave of Elephanta as
here.

In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included;
why it is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no
tales, though containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands; how it is
that to his name who yesterday departed for the other world, we prefix
so significant and infidel a word, and yet do not thus entitle him, if
he but embarks for the remotest Indies of this living earth; why the
Life Insurance Companies pay death-forfeitures upon immortals; in what
eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly, hopeless trance, yet lies
antique Adam who died sixty round centuries ago; how it is that we
still refuse to be comforted for those who we nevertheless maintain are
dwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all the living so strive to hush all
the dead; wherefore but the rumor of a knocking in a tomb will terrify
a whole city. All these things are not without their meanings.

But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these
dead doubts she gathers her most vital hope.

It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a
Nantucket voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky
light of that darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who
had gone before me. Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine. But
somehow I grew merry again. Delightful inducements to embark, fine
chance for promotion, it seems—aye, a stove boat will make me an
immortal by brevet. Yes, there is death in this business of whaling—a
speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into Eternity. But what
then? Methinks we have hugely mistaken this matter of Life and Death.
Methinks that what they call my shadow here on earth is my true
substance. Methinks that in looking at things spiritual, we are too
much like oysters observing the sun through the water, and thinking
that thick water the thinnest of air. Methinks my body is but the lees
of my better being. In fact take my body who will, take it I say, it is
not me. And therefore three cheers for Nantucket; and come a stove boat
and stove body when they will, for stave my soul, Jove himself cannot.


CHAPTER 8. The Pulpit.

I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable
robustness entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew back upon
admitting him, a quick regardful eyeing of him by all the congregation,
sufficiently attested that this fine old man was the chaplain. Yes, it
was the famous Father Mapple, so called by the whalemen, among whom he
was a very great favourite. He had been a sailor and a harpooneer in
his youth, but for many years past had dedicated his life to the
ministry. At the time I now write of, Father Mapple was in the hardy
winter of a healthy old age; that sort of old age which seems merging
into a second flowering youth, for among all the fissures of his
wrinkles, there shone certain mild gleams of a newly developing
bloom—the spring verdure peeping forth even beneath February’s snow. No
one having previously heard his history, could for the first time
behold Father Mapple without the utmost interest, because there were
certain engrafted clerical peculiarities about him, imputable to that
adventurous maritime life he had led. When he entered I observed that
he carried no umbrella, and certainly had not come in his carriage, for
his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet, and his great pilot
cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with the weight of
the water it had absorbed. However, hat and coat and overshoes were one
by one removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner;
when, arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.

Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a
regular stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the
floor, seriously contract the already small area of the chapel, the
architect, it seemed, had acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and
finished the pulpit without a stairs, substituting a perpendicular side
ladder, like those used in mounting a ship from a boat at sea. The wife
of a whaling captain had provided the chapel with a handsome pair of
red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which, being itself nicely
headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the whole contrivance,
considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no means in bad
taste. Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder, and with both
hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes, Father Mapple
cast a look upwards, and then with a truly sailor-like but still
reverential dexterity, hand over hand, mounted the steps as if
ascending the main-top of his vessel.

The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case
with swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were of
wood, so that at every step there was a joint. At my first glimpse of
the pulpit, it had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship,
these joints in the present instance seemed unnecessary. For I was not
prepared to see Father Mapple after gaining the height, slowly turn
round, and stooping over the pulpit, deliberately drag up the ladder
step by step, till the whole was deposited within, leaving him
impregnable in his little Quebec.

I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this.
Father Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and
sanctity, that I could not suspect him of courting notoriety by any
mere tricks of the stage. No, thought I, there must be some sober
reason for this thing; furthermore, it must symbolize something unseen.
Can it be, then, that by that act of physical isolation, he signifies
his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all outward worldly ties
and connexions? Yes, for replenished with the meat and wine of the
word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is a
self-containing stronghold—a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a perennial
well of water within the walls.

But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place,
borrowed from the chaplain’s former sea-farings. Between the marble
cenotaphs on either hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its back
was adorned with a large painting representing a gallant ship beating
against a terrible storm off a lee coast of black rocks and snowy
breakers. But high above the flying scud and dark-rolling clouds, there
floated a little isle of sunlight, from which beamed forth an angel’s
face; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of radiance upon the
ship’s tossed deck, something like that silver plate now inserted into
the Victory’s plank where Nelson fell. “Ah, noble ship,” the angel
seemed to say, “beat on, beat on, thou noble ship, and bear a hardy
helm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; the clouds are rolling
off—serenest azure is at hand.”

Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste that
had achieved the ladder and the picture. Its panelled front was in the
likeness of a ship’s bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on a
projecting piece of scroll work, fashioned after a ship’s fiddle-headed
beak.

What could be more full of meaning?—for the pulpit is ever this earth’s
foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit leads the
world. From thence it is the storm of God’s quick wrath is first
descried, and the bow must bear the earliest brunt. From thence it is
the God of breezes fair or foul is first invoked for favourable winds.
Yes, the world’s a ship on its passage out, and not a voyage complete;
and the pulpit is its prow.


CHAPTER 9. The Sermon.

Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority ordered
the scattered people to condense. “Starboard gangway, there! side away
to larboard—larboard gangway to starboard! Midships! midships!”

There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a
still slighter shuffling of women’s shoes, and all was quiet again, and
every eye on the preacher.

He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit’s bows, folded his
large brown hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, and
offered a prayer so deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying
at the bottom of the sea.

This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling of a
bell in a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog—in such tones he
commenced reading the following hymn; but changing his manner towards
the concluding stanzas, burst forth with a pealing exultation and joy—


  “The ribs and terrors in the whale, Arched over me a dismal gloom,
  While all God’s sun-lit waves rolled by, And lift me deepening down
  to doom.

  “I saw the opening maw of hell, With endless pains and sorrows there;
  Which none but they that feel can tell— Oh, I was plunging to
  despair.

  “In black distress, I called my God, When I could scarce believe him
  mine, He bowed his ear to my complaints— No more the whale did me
  confine.

  “With speed he flew to my relief, As on a radiant dolphin borne;
  Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone The face of my Deliverer God.

  “My song for ever shall record That terrible, that joyful hour; I
  give the glory to my God, His all the mercy and the power.”




Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the
howling of the storm. A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly turned
over the leaves of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand down upon
the proper page, said: “Beloved shipmates, clinch the last verse of the
first chapter of Jonah—‘And God had prepared a great fish to swallow up
Jonah.’”

“Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters—four yarns—is one
of the smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures. Yet what
depths of the soul does Jonah’s deep sealine sound! what a pregnant
lesson to us is this prophet! What a noble thing is that canticle in
the fish’s belly! How billow-like and boisterously grand! We feel the
floods surging over us; we sound with him to the kelpy bottom of the
waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea is about us! But _what_
is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches? Shipmates, it is a
two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful men, and a lesson to
me as a pilot of the living God. As sinful men, it is a lesson to us
all, because it is a story of the sin, hard-heartedness, suddenly
awakened fears, the swift punishment, repentance, prayers, and finally
the deliverance and joy of Jonah. As with all sinners among men, the
sin of this son of Amittai was in his wilful disobedience of the
command of God—never mind now what that command was, or how
conveyed—which he found a hard command. But all the things that God
would have us do are hard for us to do—remember that—and hence, he
oftener commands us than endeavors to persuade. And if we obey God, we
must disobey ourselves; and it is in this disobeying ourselves, wherein
the hardness of obeying God consists.

“With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at
God, by seeking to flee from Him. He thinks that a ship made by men
will carry him into countries where God does not reign, but only the
Captains of this earth. He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and seeks
a ship that’s bound for Tarshish. There lurks, perhaps, a hitherto
unheeded meaning here. By all accounts Tarshish could have been no
other city than the modern Cadiz. That’s the opinion of learned men.
And where is Cadiz, shipmates? Cadiz is in Spain; as far by water, from
Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in those ancient days, when
the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea. Because Joppa, the modern
Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterly coast of the Mediterranean,
the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz more than two thousand miles to the
westward from that, just outside the Straits of Gibraltar. See ye not
then, shipmates, that Jonah sought to flee world-wide from God?
Miserable man! Oh! most contemptible and worthy of all scorn; with
slouched hat and guilty eye, skulking from his God; prowling among the
shipping like a vile burglar hastening to cross the seas. So
disordered, self-condemning is his look, that had there been policemen
in those days, Jonah, on the mere suspicion of something wrong, had
been arrested ere he touched a deck. How plainly he’s a fugitive! no
baggage, not a hat-box, valise, or carpet-bag,—no friends accompany him
to the wharf with their adieux. At last, after much dodging search, he
finds the Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and as
he steps on board to see its Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for
the moment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger’s
evil eye. Jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and
confidence; in vain essays his wretched smile. Strong intuitions of the
man assure the mariners he can be no innocent. In their gamesome but
still serious way, one whispers to the other—“Jack, he’s robbed a
widow;” or, “Joe, do you mark him; he’s a bigamist;” or, “Harry lad, I
guess he’s the adulterer that broke jail in old Gomorrah, or belike,
one of the missing murderers from Sodom.” Another runs to read the bill
that’s stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which the ship is
moored, offering five hundred gold coins for the apprehension of a
parricide, and containing a description of his person. He reads, and
looks from Jonah to the bill; while all his sympathetic shipmates now
crowd round Jonah, prepared to lay their hands upon him. Frighted Jonah
trembles, and summoning all his boldness to his face, only looks so
much the more a coward. He will not confess himself suspected; but that
itself is strong suspicion. So he makes the best of it; and when the
sailors find him not to be the man that is advertised, they let him
pass, and he descends into the cabin.

“‘Who’s there?’ cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making
out his papers for the Customs—‘Who’s there?’ Oh! how that harmless
question mangles Jonah! For the instant he almost turns to flee again.
But he rallies. ‘I seek a passage in this ship to Tarshish; how soon
sail ye, sir?’ Thus far the busy Captain had not looked up to Jonah,
though the man now stands before him; but no sooner does he hear that
hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance. ‘We sail with the
next coming tide,’ at last he slowly answered, still intently eyeing
him. ‘No sooner, sir?’—‘Soon enough for any honest man that goes a
passenger.’ Ha! Jonah, that’s another stab. But he swiftly calls away
the Captain from that scent. ‘I’ll sail with ye,’—he says,—‘the passage
money how much is that?—I’ll pay now.’ For it is particularly written,
shipmates, as if it were a thing not to be overlooked in this history,
‘that he paid the fare thereof’ ere the craft did sail. And taken with
the context, this is full of meaning.

“Now Jonah’s Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detects
crime in any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless. In
this world, shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely, and
without a passport; whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at all
frontiers. So Jonah’s Captain prepares to test the length of Jonah’s
purse, ere he judge him openly. He charges him thrice the usual sum;
and it’s assented to. Then the Captain knows that Jonah is a fugitive;
but at the same time resolves to help a flight that paves its rear with
gold. Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse, prudent suspicions
still molest the Captain. He rings every coin to find a counterfeit.
Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah is put down for his
passage. ‘Point out my state-room, Sir,’ says Jonah now, ‘I’m
travel-weary; I need sleep.’ ‘Thou lookest like it,’ says the Captain,
‘there’s thy room.’ Jonah enters, and would lock the door, but the lock
contains no key. Hearing him foolishly fumbling there, the Captain
laughs lowly to himself, and mutters something about the doors of
convicts’ cells being never allowed to be locked within. All dressed
and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into his berth, and finds the
little state-room ceiling almost resting on his forehead. The air is
close, and Jonah gasps. Then, in that contracted hole, sunk, too,
beneath the ship’s water-line, Jonah feels the heralding presentiment
of that stifling hour, when the whale shall hold him in the smallest of
his bowels’ wards.

“Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly
oscillates in Jonah’s room; and the ship, heeling over towards the
wharf with the weight of the last bales received, the lamp, flame and
all, though in slight motion, still maintains a permanent obliquity
with reference to the room; though, in truth, infallibly straight
itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels among which it
hung. The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his berth his
tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful
fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance. But that
contradiction in the lamp more and more appals him. The floor, the
ceiling, and the side, are all awry. ‘Oh! so my conscience hangs in
me!’ he groans, ‘straight upwards, so it burns; but the chambers of my
soul are all in crookedness!’

“Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, still
reeling, but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of the
Roman race-horse but so much the more strike his steel tags into him;
as one who in that miserable plight still turns and turns in giddy
anguish, praying God for annihilation until the fit be passed; and at
last amid the whirl of woe he feels, a deep stupor steals over him, as
over the man who bleeds to death, for conscience is the wound, and
there’s naught to staunch it; so, after sore wrestlings in his berth,
Jonah’s prodigy of ponderous misery drags him drowning down to sleep.

“And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables; and
from the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, all careening,
glides to sea. That ship, my friends, was the first of recorded
smugglers! the contraband was Jonah. But the sea rebels; he will not
bear the wicked burden. A dreadful storm comes on, the ship is like to
break. But now when the boatswain calls all hands to lighten her; when
boxes, bales, and jars are clattering overboard; when the wind is
shrieking, and the men are yelling, and every plank thunders with
trampling feet right over Jonah’s head; in all this raging tumult,
Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep. He sees no black sky and raging sea,
feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or heeds he the far
rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open mouth is cleaving
the seas after him. Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone down into the sides
of the ship—a berth in the cabin as I have taken it, and was fast
asleep. But the frightened master comes to him, and shrieks in his dead
ear, ‘What meanest thou, O, sleeper! arise!’ Startled from his lethargy
by that direful cry, Jonah staggers to his feet, and stumbling to the
deck, grasps a shroud, to look out upon the sea. But at that moment he
is sprung upon by a panther billow leaping over the bulwarks. Wave
after wave thus leaps into the ship, and finding no speedy vent runs
roaring fore and aft, till the mariners come nigh to drowning while yet
afloat. And ever, as the white moon shows her affrighted face from the
steep gullies in the blackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing
bowsprit pointing high upward, but soon beat downward again towards the
tormented deep.

“Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul. In all his
cringing attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known. The
sailors mark him; more and more certain grow their suspicions of him,
and at last, fully to test the truth, by referring the whole matter to
high Heaven, they fall to casting lots, to see for whose cause this
great tempest was upon them. The lot is Jonah’s; that discovered, then
how furiously they mob him with their questions. ‘What is thine
occupation? Whence comest thou? Thy country? What people? But mark now,
my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah. The eager mariners but ask
him who he is, and where from; whereas, they not only receive an answer
to those questions, but likewise another answer to a question not put
by them, but the unsolicited answer is forced from Jonah by the hard
hand of God that is upon him.

“‘I am a Hebrew,’ he cries—and then—‘I fear the Lord the God of Heaven
who hath made the sea and the dry land!’ Fear him, O Jonah? Aye, well
mightest thou fear the Lord God _then!_ Straightway, he now goes on to
make a full confession; whereupon the mariners became more and more
appalled, but still are pitiful. For when Jonah, not yet supplicating
God for mercy, since he but too well knew the darkness of his
deserts,—when wretched Jonah cries out to them to take him and cast him
forth into the sea, for he knew that for _his_ sake this great tempest
was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seek by other means
to save the ship. But all in vain; the indignant gale howls louder;
then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the other they not
unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.

“And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea;
when instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea
is still, as Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth water
behind. He goes down in the whirling heart of such a masterless
commotion that he scarce heeds the moment when he drops seething into
the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the whale shoots-to all his ivory
teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his prison. Then Jonah prayed
unto the Lord out of the fish’s belly. But observe his prayer, and
learn a weighty lesson. For sinful as he is, Jonah does not weep and
wail for direct deliverance. He feels that his dreadful punishment is
just. He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting himself with
this, that spite of all his pains and pangs, he will still look towards
His holy temple. And here, shipmates, is true and faithful repentance;
not clamorous for pardon, but grateful for punishment. And how pleasing
to God was this conduct in Jonah, is shown in the eventual deliverance
of him from the sea and the whale. Shipmates, I do not place Jonah
before you to be copied for his sin but I do place him before you as a
model for repentance. Sin not; but if you do, take heed to repent of it
like Jonah.”

While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking,
slanting storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who,
when describing Jonah’s sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself.
His deep chest heaved as with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed
the warring elements at work; and the thunders that rolled away from
off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping from his eye, made all his
simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that was strange to them.

There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the
leaves of the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, with
closed eyes, for the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.

But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his head lowly,
with an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake these
words:

“Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands press
upon me. I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson that
Jonah teaches to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and still more to
me, for I am a greater sinner than ye. And now how gladly would I come
down from this mast-head and sit on the hatches there where you sit,
and listen as you listen, while some one of you reads _me_ that other
and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to _me_, as a pilot of the
living God. How being an anointed pilot-prophet, or speaker of true
things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those unwelcome truths in the
ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at the hostility he should
raise, fled from his mission, and sought to escape his duty and his God
by taking ship at Joppa. But God is everywhere; Tarshish he never
reached. As we have seen, God came upon him in the whale, and swallowed
him down to living gulfs of doom, and with swift slantings tore him
along ‘into the midst of the seas,’ where the eddying depths sucked him
ten thousand fathoms down, and ‘the weeds were wrapped about his head,’
and all the watery world of woe bowled over him. Yet even then beyond
the reach of any plummet—‘out of the belly of hell’—when the whale
grounded upon the ocean’s utmost bones, even then, God heard the
engulphed, repenting prophet when he cried. Then God spake unto the
fish; and from the shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale
came breeching up towards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the
delights of air and earth; and ‘vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;’
when the word of the Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and
beaten—his ears, like two sea-shells, still multitudinously murmuring
of the ocean—Jonah did the Almighty’s bidding. And what was that,
shipmates? To preach the Truth to the face of Falsehood! That was it!

“This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot of
the living God who slights it. Woe to him whom this world charms from
Gospel duty! Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters when God
has brewed them into a gale! Woe to him who seeks to please rather than
to appal! Woe to him whose good name is more to him than goodness! Woe
to him who, in this world, courts not dishonor! Woe to him who would
not be true, even though to be false were salvation! Yea, woe to him
who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while preaching to others is
himself a castaway!”

He dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting his
face to them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out with
a heavenly enthusiasm,—“But oh! shipmates! on the starboard hand of
every woe, there is a sure delight; and higher the top of that delight,
than the bottom of the woe is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than
the kelson is low? Delight is to him—a far, far upward, and inward
delight—who against the proud gods and commodores of this earth, ever
stands forth his own inexorable self. Delight is to him whose strong
arms yet support him, when the ship of this base treacherous world has
gone down beneath him. Delight is to him, who gives no quarter in the
truth, and kills, burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck it out
from under the robes of Senators and Judges. Delight,—top-gallant
delight is to him, who acknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his
God, and is only a patriot to heaven. Delight is to him, whom all the
waves of the billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake
from this sure Keel of the Ages. And eternal delight and deliciousness
will be his, who coming to lay him down, can say with his final
breath—O Father!—chiefly known to me by Thy rod—mortal or immortal,
here I die. I have striven to be Thine, more than to be this world’s,
or mine own. Yet this is nothing: I leave eternity to Thee; for what is
man that he should live out the lifetime of his God?”

He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face with
his hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had departed,
and he was left alone in the place.


CHAPTER 10. A Bosom Friend.

Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there
quite alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some
time. He was sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on the
stove hearth, and in one hand was holding close up to his face that
little negro idol of his; peering hard into its face, and with a
jack-knife gently whittling away at its nose, meanwhile humming to
himself in his heathenish way.

But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon, going
to the table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his lap
began counting the pages with deliberate regularity; at every fiftieth
page—as I fancied—stopping a moment, looking vacantly around him, and
giving utterance to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of astonishment. He
would then begin again at the next fifty; seeming to commence at number
one each time, as though he could not count more than fifty, and it was
only by such a large number of fifties being found together, that his
astonishment at the multitude of pages was excited.

With much interest I sat watching him. Savage though he was, and
hideously marred about the face—at least to my taste—his countenance
yet had a something in it which was by no means disagreeable. You
cannot hide the soul. Through all his unearthly tattooings, I thought I
saw the traces of a simple honest heart; and in his large, deep eyes,
fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens of a spirit that would dare a
thousand devils. And besides all this, there was a certain lofty
bearing about the Pagan, which even his uncouthness could not
altogether maim. He looked like a man who had never cringed and never
had had a creditor. Whether it was, too, that his head being shaved,
his forehead was drawn out in freer and brighter relief, and looked
more expansive than it otherwise would, this I will not venture to
decide; but certain it was his head was phrenologically an excellent
one. It may seem ridiculous, but it reminded me of General Washington’s
head, as seen in the popular busts of him. It had the same long
regularly graded retreating slope from above the brows, which were
likewise very projecting, like two long promontories thickly wooded on
top. Queequeg was George Washington cannibalistically developed.

Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to be
looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my
presence, never troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but
appeared wholly occupied with counting the pages of the marvellous
book. Considering how sociably we had been sleeping together the night
previous, and especially considering the affectionate arm I had found
thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I thought this indifference
of his very strange. But savages are strange beings; at times you do
not know exactly how to take them. At first they are overawing; their
calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a Socratic wisdom. I had
noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at all, or but very little,
with the other seamen in the inn. He made no advances whatever;
appeared to have no desire to enlarge the circle of his acquaintances.
All this struck me as mighty singular; yet, upon second thoughts, there
was something almost sublime in it. Here was a man some twenty thousand
miles from home, by the way of Cape Horn, that is—which was the only
way he could get there—thrown among people as strange to him as though
he were in the planet Jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease;
preserving the utmost serenity; content with his own companionship;
always equal to himself. Surely this was a touch of fine philosophy;
though no doubt he had never heard there was such a thing as that. But,
perhaps, to be true philosophers, we mortals should not be conscious of
so living or so striving. So soon as I hear that such or such a man
gives himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like the
dyspeptic old woman, he must have “broken his digester.”

As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in that
mild stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it then
only glows to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms gathering
round the casements, and peering in upon us silent, solitary twain; the
storm booming without in solemn swells; I began to be sensible of
strange feelings. I felt a melting in me. No more my splintered heart
and maddened hand were turned against the wolfish world. This soothing
savage had redeemed it. There he sat, his very indifference speaking a
nature in which there lurked no civilized hypocrisies and bland
deceits. Wild he was; a very sight of sights to see; yet I began to
feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him. And those same things that
would have repelled most others, they were the very magnets that thus
drew me. I’ll try a pagan friend, thought I, since Christian kindness
has proved but hollow courtesy. I drew my bench near him, and made some
friendly signs and hints, doing my best to talk with him meanwhile. At
first he little noticed these advances; but presently, upon my
referring to his last night’s hospitalities, he made out to ask me
whether we were again to be bedfellows. I told him yes; whereat I
thought he looked pleased, perhaps a little complimented.

We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain to
him the purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures
that were in it. Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we
went to jabbering the best we could about the various outer sights to
be seen in this famous town. Soon I proposed a social smoke; and,
producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly offered me a puff. And
then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of his, and keeping it
regularly passing between us.

If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan’s
breast, this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and
left us cronies. He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and
unbiddenly as I to him; and when our smoke was over, he pressed his
forehead against mine, clasped me round the waist, and said that
henceforth we were married; meaning, in his country’s phrase, that we
were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if need should be. In a
countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have seemed far too
premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple savage
those old rules would not apply.

After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room
together. He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out his
enormous tobacco wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some
thirty dollars in silver; then spreading them on the table, and
mechanically dividing them into two equal portions, pushed one of them
towards me, and said it was mine. I was going to remonstrate; but he
silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers’ pockets. I let them stay.
He then went about his evening prayers, took out his idol, and removed
the paper fireboard. By certain signs and symptoms, I thought he seemed
anxious for me to join him; but well knowing what was to follow, I
deliberated a moment whether, in case he invited me, I would comply or
otherwise.

I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
Presbyterian Church. How then could I unite with this wild idolator in
worshipping his piece of wood? But what is worship? thought I. Do you
suppose now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and
earth—pagans and all included—can possibly be jealous of an
insignificant bit of black wood? Impossible! But what is worship?—to do
the will of God—_that_ is worship. And what is the will of God?—to do
to my fellow man what I would have my fellow man to do to me—_that_ is
the will of God. Now, Queequeg is my fellow man. And what do I wish
that this Queequeg would do to me? Why, unite with me in my particular
Presbyterian form of worship. Consequently, I must then unite with him
in his; ergo, I must turn idolator. So I kindled the shavings; helped
prop up the innocent little idol; offered him burnt biscuit with
Queequeg; salamed before him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that
done, we undressed and went to bed, at peace with our own consciences
and all the world. But we did not go to sleep without some little chat.

How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for confidential
disclosures between friends. Man and wife, they say, there open the
very bottom of their souls to each other; and some old couples often
lie and chat over old times till nearly morning. Thus, then, in our
hearts’ honeymoon, lay I and Queequeg—a cosy, loving pair.


CHAPTER 11. Nightgown.

We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and
Queequeg now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs
over mine, and then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and free
and easy were we; when, at last, by reason of our confabulations, what
little nappishness remained in us altogether departed, and we felt like
getting up again, though day-break was yet some way down the future.

Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent position
began to grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves
sitting up; the clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the
head-board with our four knees drawn up close together, and our two
noses bending over them, as if our kneepans were warming-pans. We felt
very nice and snug, the more so since it was so chilly out of doors;
indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there was no fire in the
room. The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily warmth, some
small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this world
that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself. If
you flatter yourself that you are all over comfortable, and have been
so a long time, then you cannot be said to be comfortable any more. But
if, like Queequeg and me in the bed, the tip of your nose or the crown
of your head be slightly chilled, why then, indeed, in the general
consciousness you feel most delightfully and unmistakably warm. For
this reason a sleeping apartment should never be furnished with a fire,
which is one of the luxurious discomforts of the rich. For the height
of this sort of deliciousness is to have nothing but the blanket
between you and your snugness and the cold of the outer air. Then there
you lie like the one warm spark in the heart of an arctic crystal.

We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all at
once I thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets, whether
by day or by night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way of always
keeping my eyes shut, in order the more to concentrate the snugness of
being in bed. Because no man can ever feel his own identity aright
except his eyes be closed; as if darkness were indeed the proper
element of our essences, though light be more congenial to our clayey
part. Upon opening my eyes then, and coming out of my own pleasant and
self-created darkness into the imposed and coarse outer gloom of the
unilluminated twelve-o’clock-at-night, I experienced a disagreeable
revulsion. Nor did I at all object to the hint from Queequeg that
perhaps it were best to strike a light, seeing that we were so wide
awake; and besides he felt a strong desire to have a few quiet puffs
from his Tomahawk. Be it said, that though I had felt such a strong
repugnance to his smoking in the bed the night before, yet see how
elastic our stiff prejudices grow when love once comes to bend them.
For now I liked nothing better than to have Queequeg smoking by me,
even in bed, because he seemed to be full of such serene household joy
then. I no more felt unduly concerned for the landlord’s policy of
insurance. I was only alive to the condensed confidential
comfortableness of sharing a pipe and a blanket with a real friend.
With our shaggy jackets drawn about our shoulders, we now passed the
Tomahawk from one to the other, till slowly there grew over us a blue
hanging tester of smoke, illuminated by the flame of the new-lit lamp.

Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to
far distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native island;
and, eager to hear his history, I begged him to go on and tell it. He
gladly complied. Though at the time I but ill comprehended not a few of
his words, yet subsequent disclosures, when I had become more familiar
with his broken phraseology, now enable me to present the whole story
such as it may prove in the mere skeleton I give.


CHAPTER 12. Biographical.

Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the West and
South. It is not down in any map; true places never are.

When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in a
grass clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a green
sapling; even then, in Queequeg’s ambitious soul, lurked a strong
desire to see something more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or
two. His father was a High Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest; and
on the maternal side he boasted aunts who were the wives of
unconquerable warriors. There was excellent blood in his veins—royal
stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal propensity he
nourished in his untutored youth.

A Sag Harbor ship visited his father’s bay, and Queequeg sought a
passage to Christian lands. But the ship, having her full complement of
seamen, spurned his suit; and not all the King his father’s influence
could prevail. But Queequeg vowed a vow. Alone in his canoe, he paddled
off to a distant strait, which he knew the ship must pass through when
she quitted the island. On one side was a coral reef; on the other a
low tongue of land, covered with mangrove thickets that grew out into
the water. Hiding his canoe, still afloat, among these thickets, with
its prow seaward, he sat down in the stern, paddle low in hand; and
when the ship was gliding by, like a flash he darted out; gained her
side; with one backward dash of his foot capsized and sank his canoe;
climbed up the chains; and throwing himself at full length upon the
deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and swore not to let it go, though
hacked in pieces.

In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a
cutlass over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and
Queequeg budged not. Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his
wild desire to visit Christendom, the captain at last relented, and
told him he might make himself at home. But this fine young savage—this
sea Prince of Wales, never saw the Captain’s cabin. They put him down
among the sailors, and made a whaleman of him. But like Czar Peter
content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities, Queequeg disdained
no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily gain the power of
enlightening his untutored countrymen. For at bottom—so he told me—he
was actuated by a profound desire to learn among the Christians, the
arts whereby to make his people still happier than they were; and more
than that, still better than they were. But, alas! the practices of
whalemen soon convinced him that even Christians could be both
miserable and wicked; infinitely more so, than all his father’s
heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag Harbor; and seeing what the
sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket, and seeing how they
spent their wages in _that_ place also, poor Queequeg gave it up for
lost. Thought he, it’s a wicked world in all meridians; I’ll die a
pagan.

And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these Christians,
wore their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish. Hence the queer
ways about him, though now some time from home.

By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and having
a coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and gone, he
being very old and feeble at the last accounts. He answered no, not
yet; and added that he was fearful Christianity, or rather Christians,
had unfitted him for ascending the pure and undefiled throne of thirty
pagan Kings before him. But by and by, he said, he would return,—as
soon as he felt himself baptized again. For the nonce, however, he
proposed to sail about, and sow his wild oats in all four oceans. They
had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed iron was in lieu of a
sceptre now.

I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
movements. He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation. Upon
this, I told him that whaling was my own design, and informed him of my
intention to sail out of Nantucket, as being the most promising port
for an adventurous whaleman to embark from. He at once resolved to
accompany me to that island, ship aboard the same vessel, get into the
same watch, the same boat, the same mess with me, in short to share my
every hap; with both my hands in his, boldly dip into the Potluck of
both worlds. To all this I joyously assented; for besides the affection
I now felt for Queequeg, he was an experienced harpooneer, and as such,
could not fail to be of great usefulness to one, who, like me, was
wholly ignorant of the mysteries of whaling, though well acquainted
with the sea, as known to merchant seamen.

His story being ended with his pipe’s last dying puff, Queequeg
embraced me, pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the
light, we rolled over from each other, this way and that, and very soon
were sleeping.


CHAPTER 13. Wheelbarrow.

Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a barber,
for a block, I settled my own and comrade’s bill; using, however, my
comrade’s money. The grinning landlord, as well as the boarders, seemed
amazingly tickled at the sudden friendship which had sprung up between
me and Queequeg—especially as Peter Coffin’s cock and bull stories
about him had previously so much alarmed me concerning the very person
whom I now companied with.

We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own
poor carpet-bag, and Queequeg’s canvas sack and hammock, away we went
down to “the Moss,” the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at the
wharf. As we were going along the people stared; not at Queequeg so
much—for they were used to seeing cannibals like him in their
streets,—but at seeing him and me upon such confidential terms. But we
heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by turns, and Queequeg
now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon barbs. I
asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him ashore, and
whether all whaling ships did not find their own harpoons. To this, in
substance, he replied, that though what I hinted was true enough, yet
he had a particular affection for his own harpoon, because it was of
assured stuff, well tried in many a mortal combat, and deeply intimate
with the hearts of whales. In short, like many inland reapers and
mowers, who go into the farmers’ meadows armed with their own
scythes—though in no wise obliged to furnish them—even so, Queequeg,
for his own private reasons, preferred his own harpoon.

Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story about
the first wheelbarrow he had ever seen. It was in Sag Harbor. The
owners of his ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry his
heavy chest to his boarding house. Not to seem ignorant about the
thing—though in truth he was entirely so, concerning the precise way in
which to manage the barrow—Queequeg puts his chest upon it; lashes it
fast; and then shoulders the barrow and marches up the wharf. “Why,”
said I, “Queequeg, you might have known better than that, one would
think. Didn’t the people laugh?”

Upon this, he told me another story. The people of his island of
Rokovoko, it seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant water
of young cocoanuts into a large stained calabash like a punchbowl; and
this punchbowl always forms the great central ornament on the braided
mat where the feast is held. Now a certain grand merchant ship once
touched at Rokovoko, and its commander—from all accounts, a very
stately punctilious gentleman, at least for a sea captain—this
commander was invited to the wedding feast of Queequeg’s sister, a
pretty young princess just turned of ten. Well; when all the wedding
guests were assembled at the bride’s bamboo cottage, this Captain
marches in, and being assigned the post of honor, placed himself over
against the punchbowl, and between the High Priest and his majesty the
King, Queequeg’s father. Grace being said,—for those people have their
grace as well as we—though Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such
times look downwards to our platters, they, on the contrary, copying
the ducks, glance upwards to the great Giver of all feasts—Grace, I
say, being said, the High Priest opens the banquet by the immemorial
ceremony of the island; that is, dipping his consecrated and
consecrating fingers into the bowl before the blessed beverage
circulates. Seeing himself placed next the Priest, and noting the
ceremony, and thinking himself—being Captain of a ship—as having plain
precedence over a mere island King, especially in the King’s own
house—the Captain coolly proceeds to wash his hands in the
punchbowl;—taking it I suppose for a huge finger-glass. “Now,” said
Queequeg, “what you tink now?—Didn’t our people laugh?”

At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the
schooner. Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river. On one
side, New Bedford rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered trees
all glittering in the clear, cold air. Huge hills and mountains of
casks on casks were piled upon her wharves, and side by side the
world-wandering whale ships lay silent and safely moored at last; while
from others came a sound of carpenters and coopers, with blended noises
of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all betokening that new cruises
were on the start; that one most perilous and long voyage ended, only
begins a second; and a second ended, only begins a third, and so on,
for ever and for aye. Such is the endlessness, yea, the intolerableness
of all earthly effort.

Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the little
Moss tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his
snortings. How I snuffed that Tartar air!—how I spurned that turnpike
earth!—that common highway all over dented with the marks of slavish
heels and hoofs; and turned me to admire the magnanimity of the sea
which will permit no records.

At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me.
His dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed
teeth. On, on we flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to
the blast; ducked and dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan.
Sideways leaning, we sideways darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a
wire; the two tall masts buckling like Indian canes in land tornadoes.
So full of this reeling scene were we, as we stood by the plunging
bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the jeering glances of
the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that two fellow
beings should be so companionable; as though a white man were anything
more dignified than a whitewashed negro. But there were some boobies
and bumpkins there, who, by their intense greenness, must have come
from the heart and centre of all verdure. Queequeg caught one of these
young saplings mimicking him behind his back. I thought the bumpkin’s
hour of doom was come. Dropping his harpoon, the brawny savage caught
him in his arms, and by an almost miraculous dexterity and strength,
sent him high up bodily into the air; then slightly tapping his stern
in mid-somerset, the fellow landed with bursting lungs upon his feet,
while Queequeg, turning his back upon him, lighted his tomahawk pipe
and passed it to me for a puff.

“Capting! Capting!” yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;
“Capting, Capting, here’s the devil.”

“Hallo, _you_ sir,” cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking
up to Queequeg, “what in thunder do you mean by that? Don’t you know
you might have killed that chap?”

“What him say?” said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.

“He say,” said I, “that you came near kill-e that man there,” pointing
to the still shivering greenhorn.

“Kill-e,” cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an unearthly
expression of disdain, “ah! him bevy small-e fish-e; Queequeg no kill-e
so small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!”

“Look you,” roared the Captain, “I’ll kill-e _you_, you cannibal, if
you try any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye.”

But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain to
mind his own eye. The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had parted
the weather-sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from side to
side, completely sweeping the entire after part of the deck. The poor
fellow whom Queequeg had handled so roughly, was swept overboard; all
hands were in a panic; and to attempt snatching at the boom to stay it,
seemed madness. It flew from right to left, and back again, almost in
one ticking of a watch, and every instant seemed on the point of
snapping into splinters. Nothing was done, and nothing seemed capable
of being done; those on deck rushed towards the bows, and stood eyeing
the boom as if it were the lower jaw of an exasperated whale. In the
midst of this consternation, Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and
crawling under the path of the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured
one end to the bulwarks, and then flinging the other like a lasso,
caught it round the boom as it swept over his head, and at the next
jerk, the spar was that way trapped, and all was safe. The schooner was
run into the wind, and while the hands were clearing away the stern
boat, Queequeg, stripped to the waist, darted from the side with a long
living arc of a leap. For three minutes or more he was seen swimming
like a dog, throwing his long arms straight out before him, and by
turns revealing his brawny shoulders through the freezing foam. I
looked at the grand and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.
The greenhorn had gone down. Shooting himself perpendicularly from the
water, Queequeg, now took an instant’s glance around him, and seeming
to see just how matters were, dived down and disappeared. A few minutes
more, and he rose again, one arm still striking out, and with the other
dragging a lifeless form. The boat soon picked them up. The poor
bumpkin was restored. All hands voted Queequeg a noble trump; the
captain begged his pardon. From that hour I clove to Queequeg like a
barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long dive.

Was there ever such unconsciousness? He did not seem to think that he
at all deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies. He
only asked for water—fresh water—something to wipe the brine off; that
done, he put on dry clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning against the
bulwarks, and mildly eyeing those around him, seemed to be saying to
himself—“It’s a mutual, joint-stock world, in all meridians. We
cannibals must help these Christians.”


CHAPTER 14. Nantucket.

Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after a
fine run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.

Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it. See what a real corner of
the world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more lonely
than the Eddystone lighthouse. Look at it—a mere hillock, and elbow of
sand; all beach, without a background. There is more sand there than
you would use in twenty years as a substitute for blotting paper. Some
gamesome wights will tell you that they have to plant weeds there, they
don’t grow naturally; that they import Canada thistles; that they have
to send beyond seas for a spile to stop a leak in an oil cask; that
pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like bits of the true
cross in Rome; that people there plant toadstools before their houses,
to get under the shade in summer time; that one blade of grass makes an
oasis, three blades in a day’s walk a prairie; that they wear quicksand
shoes, something like Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut up,
belted about, every way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island
of by the ocean, that to their very chairs and tables small clams will
sometimes be found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles. But these
extravaganzas only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.

Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was
settled by the red-men. Thus goes the legend. In olden times an eagle
swooped down upon the New England coast, and carried off an infant
Indian in his talons. With loud lament the parents saw their child
borne out of sight over the wide waters. They resolved to follow in the
same direction. Setting out in their canoes, after a perilous passage
they discovered the island, and there they found an empty ivory
casket,—the poor little Indian’s skeleton.

What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should
take to the sea for a livelihood! They first caught crabs and quohogs
in the sand; grown bolder, they waded out with nets for mackerel; more
experienced, they pushed off in boats and captured cod; and at last,
launching a navy of great ships on the sea, explored this watery world;
put an incessant belt of circumnavigations round it; peeped in at
Behring’s Straits; and in all seasons and all oceans declared
everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that has survived the
flood; most monstrous and most mountainous! That Himmalehan, salt-sea
Mastodon, clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power, that
his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and
malicious assaults!

And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing from
their ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery world like
so many Alexanders; parcelling out among them the Atlantic, Pacific,
and Indian oceans, as the three pirate powers did Poland. Let America
add Mexico to Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada; let the English
overswarm all India, and hang out their blazing banner from the sun;
two thirds of this terraqueous globe are the Nantucketer’s. For the sea
is his; he owns it, as Emperors own empires; other seamen having but a
right of way through it. Merchant ships are but extension bridges;
armed ones but floating forts; even pirates and privateers, though
following the sea as highwaymen the road, they but plunder other ships,
other fragments of the land like themselves, without seeking to draw
their living from the bottomless deep itself. The Nantucketer, he alone
resides and riots on the sea; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to
it in ships; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation.
_There_ is his home; _there_ lies his business, which a Noah’s flood
would not interrupt, though it overwhelmed all the millions in China.
He lives on the sea, as prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among
the waves, he climbs them as chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years
he knows not the land; so that when he comes to it at last, it smells
like another world, more strangely than the moon would to an Earthsman.
With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to
sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the Nantucketer, out of sight
of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest, while under his
very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.


CHAPTER 15. Chowder.

It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to
anchor, and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to no
business that day, at least none but a supper and a bed. The landlord
of the Spouter-Inn had recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the
Try Pots, whom he asserted to be the proprietor of one of the best kept
hotels in all Nantucket, and moreover he had assured us that Cousin
Hosea, as he called him, was famous for his chowders. In short, he
plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better than try pot-luck
at the Try Pots. But the directions he had given us about keeping a
yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church to
the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a
corner three points to the starboard, and that done, then ask the first
man we met where the place was: these crooked directions of his very
much puzzled us at first, especially as, at the outset, Queequeg
insisted that the yellow warehouse—our first point of departure—must be
left on the larboard hand, whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say
it was on the starboard. However, by dint of beating about a little in
the dark, and now and then knocking up a peaceable inhabitant to
inquire the way, we at last came to something which there was no
mistaking.

Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses’ ears,
swung from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an
old doorway. The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other
side, so that this old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows.
Perhaps I was over sensitive to such impressions at the time, but I
could not help staring at this gallows with a vague misgiving. A sort
of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the two remaining horns; yes,
_two_ of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me. It’s ominous, thinks
I. A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling port;
tombstones staring at me in the whalemen’s chapel; and here a gallows!
and a pair of prodigious black pots too! Are these last throwing out
oblique hints touching Tophet?

I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman
with yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn,
under a dull red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an injured
eye, and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen
shirt.

“Get along with ye,” said she to the man, “or I’ll be combing ye!”

“Come on, Queequeg,” said I, “all right. There’s Mrs. Hussey.”

And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving
Mrs. Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs. Upon
making known our desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey,
postponing further scolding for the present, ushered us into a little
room, and seating us at a table spread with the relics of a recently
concluded repast, turned round to us and said—“Clam or Cod?”

“What’s that about Cods, ma’am?” said I, with much politeness.

“Clam or Cod?” she repeated.

“A clam for supper? a cold clam; is _that_ what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?”
says I, “but that’s a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter
time, ain’t it, Mrs. Hussey?”

But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple
Shirt, who was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear nothing
but the word “clam,” Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading
to the kitchen, and bawling out “clam for two,” disappeared.

“Queequeg,” said I, “do you think that we can make out a supper for us
both on one clam?”

However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the
apparently cheerless prospect before us. But when that smoking chowder
came in, the mystery was delightfully explained. Oh, sweet friends!
hearken to me. It was made of small juicy clams, scarcely bigger than
hazel nuts, mixed with pounded ship biscuit, and salted pork cut up
into little flakes; the whole enriched with butter, and plentifully
seasoned with pepper and salt. Our appetites being sharpened by the
frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing his favourite fishing
food before him, and the chowder being surpassingly excellent, we
despatched it with great expedition: when leaning back a moment and
bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey’s clam and cod announcement, I thought I
would try a little experiment. Stepping to the kitchen door, I uttered
the word “cod” with great emphasis, and resumed my seat. In a few
moments the savoury steam came forth again, but with a different
flavor, and in good time a fine cod-chowder was placed before us.

We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks I
to myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head? What’s
that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people? “But look,
Queequeg, ain’t that a live eel in your bowl? Where’s your harpoon?”

Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved its
name; for the pots there were always boiling chowders. Chowder for
breakfast, and chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till you
began to look for fish-bones coming through your clothes. The area
before the house was paved with clam-shells. Mrs. Hussey wore a
polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and Hosea Hussey had his account
books bound in superior old shark-skin. There was a fishy flavor to the
milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till one morning
happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen’s
boats, I saw Hosea’s brindled cow feeding on fish remnants, and
marching along the sand with each foot in a cod’s decapitated head,
looking very slip-shod, I assure ye.

Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to
precede me up the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and demanded
his harpoon; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers. “Why not?” said I;
“every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon—but why not?” “Because
it’s dangerous,” says she. “Ever since young Stiggs coming from that
unfort’nt v’y’ge of his, when he was gone four years and a half, with
only three barrels of _ile_, was found dead in my first floor back,
with his harpoon in his side; ever since then I allow no boarders to
take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night. So, Mr. Queequeg”
(for she had learned his name), “I will just take this here iron, and
keep it for you till morning. But the chowder; clam or cod to-morrow
for breakfast, men?”

“Both,” says I; “and let’s have a couple of smoked herring by way of
variety.”


CHAPTER 16. The Ship.

In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow. But to my surprise and no
small concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had been
diligently consulting Yojo—the name of his black little god—and Yojo
had told him two or three times over, and strongly insisted upon it
everyway, that instead of our going together among the whaling-fleet in
harbor, and in concert selecting our craft; instead of this, I say,
Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of the ship should rest
wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us; and, in order
to do so, had already pitched upon a vessel, which, if left to myself,
I, Ishmael, should infallibly light upon, for all the world as though
it had turned out by chance; and in that vessel I must immediately ship
myself, for the present irrespective of Queequeg.

I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed great
confidence in the excellence of Yojo’s judgment and surprising forecast
of things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a rather
good sort of god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole, but in
all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs.

Now, this plan of Queequeg’s, or rather Yojo’s, touching the selection
of our craft; I did not like that plan at all. I had not a little
relied upon Queequeg’s sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to
carry us and our fortunes securely. But as all my remonstrances
produced no effect upon Queequeg, I was obliged to acquiesce; and
accordingly prepared to set about this business with a determined
rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should quickly settle that
trifling little affair. Next morning early, leaving Queequeg shut up
with Yojo in our little bedroom—for it seemed that it was some sort of
Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer with
Queequeg and Yojo that day; _how_ it was I never could find out, for,
though I applied myself to it several times, I never could master his
liturgies and XXXIX Articles—leaving Queequeg, then, fasting on his
tomahawk pipe, and Yojo warming himself at his sacrificial fire of
shavings, I sallied out among the shipping. After much prolonged
sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt that there were three
ships up for three-years’ voyages—The Devil-dam, the Tit-bit, and the
Pequod. _Devil-Dam_, I do not know the origin of; _Tit-bit_ is obvious;
_Pequod_, you will no doubt remember, was the name of a celebrated
tribe of Massachusetts Indians; now extinct as the ancient Medes. I
peered and pryed about the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the
Tit-bit; and finally, going on board the Pequod, looked around her for
a moment, and then decided that this was the very ship for us.

You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I
know;—square-toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box
galliots, and what not; but take my word for it, you never saw such a
rare old craft as this same rare old Pequod. She was a ship of the old
school, rather small if anything; with an old-fashioned claw-footed
look about her. Long seasoned and weather-stained in the typhoons and
calms of all four oceans, her old hull’s complexion was darkened like a
French grenadier’s, who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia. Her
venerable bows looked bearded. Her masts—cut somewhere on the coast of
Japan, where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale—her masts
stood stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne. Her
ancient decks were worn and wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped
flag-stone in Canterbury Cathedral where Becket bled. But to all these
her old antiquities, were added new and marvellous features, pertaining
to the wild business that for more than half a century she had
followed. Old Captain Peleg, many years her chief-mate, before he
commanded another vessel of his own, and now a retired seaman, and one
of the principal owners of the Pequod,—this old Peleg, during the term
of his chief-mateship, had built upon her original grotesqueness, and
inlaid it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and device,
unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake’s carved buckler or
bedstead. She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor, his
neck heavy with pendants of polished ivory. She was a thing of
trophies. A cannibal of a craft, tricking herself forth in the chased
bones of her enemies. All round, her unpanelled, open bulwarks were
garnished like one continuous jaw, with the long sharp teeth of the
sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to fasten her old hempen thews
and tendons to. Those thews ran not through base blocks of land wood,
but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory. Scorning a turnstile
wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a tiller; and that tiller
was in one mass, curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her
hereditary foe. The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest,
felt like the Tartar, when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching
its jaw. A noble craft, but somehow a most melancholy! All noble things
are touched with that.

Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having
authority, in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage, at
first I saw nobody; but I could not well overlook a strange sort of
tent, or rather wigwam, pitched a little behind the main-mast. It
seemed only a temporary erection used in port. It was of a conical
shape, some ten feet high; consisting of the long, huge slabs of limber
black bone taken from the middle and highest part of the jaws of the
right-whale. Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a circle of
these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each other, and at
the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose hairy fibres waved
to and fro like the top-knot on some old Pottowottamie Sachem’s head. A
triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship, so that the
insider commanded a complete view forward.

And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who by
his aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and the
ship’s work suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden of
command. He was seated on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling all
over with curious carving; and the bottom of which was formed of a
stout interlacing of the same elastic stuff of which the wigwam was
constructed.

There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance of
the elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old seamen,
and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker style;
only there was a fine and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest
wrinkles interlacing round his eyes, which must have arisen from his
continual sailings in many hard gales, and always looking to
windward;—for this causes the muscles about the eyes to become pursed
together. Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.

“Is this the Captain of the Pequod?” said I, advancing to the door of
the tent.

“Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of
him?” he demanded.

“I was thinking of shipping.”

“Thou wast, wast thou? I see thou art no Nantucketer—ever been in a
stove boat?”

“No, Sir, I never have.”

“Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say—eh?

“Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn. I’ve been
several voyages in the merchant service, and I think that—”

“Merchant service be damned. Talk not that lingo to me. Dost see that
leg?—I’ll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou talkest of
the marchant service to me again. Marchant service indeed! I suppose
now ye feel considerable proud of having served in those marchant
ships. But flukes! man, what makes thee want to go a whaling, eh?—it
looks a little suspicious, don’t it, eh?—Hast not been a pirate, hast
thou?—Didst not rob thy last Captain, didst thou?—Dost not think of
murdering the officers when thou gettest to sea?”

I protested my innocence of these things. I saw that under the mask of
these half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated
Quakerish Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather
distrustful of all aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the
Vineyard.

“But what takes thee a-whaling? I want to know that before I think of
shipping ye.”

“Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is. I want to see the world.”

“Want to see what whaling is, eh? Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab?”

“Who is Captain Ahab, sir?”

“Aye, aye, I thought so. Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship.”

“I am mistaken then. I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself.”

“Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg—that’s who ye are speaking to,
young man. It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted
out for the voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including crew. We
are part owners and agents. But as I was going to say, if thou wantest
to know what whaling is, as thou tellest ye do, I can put ye in a way
of finding it out before ye bind yourself to it, past backing out. Clap
eye on Captain Ahab, young man, and thou wilt find that he has only one
leg.”

“What do you mean, sir? Was the other one lost by a whale?”

“Lost by a whale! Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured, chewed
up, crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a
boat!—ah, ah!”

I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched at
the hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly as I
could, “What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could I know
there was any peculiar ferocity in that particular whale, though indeed
I might have inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident.”

“Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d’ye see; thou
dost not talk shark a bit. _Sure_, ye’ve been to sea before now; sure
of that?”

“Sir,” said I, “I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in
the merchant—”

“Hard down out of that! Mind what I said about the marchant
service—don’t aggravate me—I won’t have it. But let us understand each
other. I have given thee a hint about what whaling is; do ye yet feel
inclined for it?”

“I do, sir.”

“Very good. Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live
whale’s throat, and then jump after it? Answer, quick!”

“I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not to
be got rid of, that is; which I don’t take to be the fact.”

“Good again. Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to find
out by experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in order to
see the world? Was not that what ye said? I thought so. Well then, just
step forward there, and take a peep over the weather-bow, and then back
to me and tell me what ye see there.”

For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not
knowing exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest. But
concentrating all his crow’s feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg started
me on the errand.

Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that the
ship swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely
pointing towards the open ocean. The prospect was unlimited, but
exceedingly monotonous and forbidding; not the slightest variety that I
could see.

“Well, what’s the report?” said Peleg when I came back; “what did ye
see?”

“Not much,” I replied—“nothing but water; considerable horizon though,
and there’s a squall coming up, I think.”

“Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world? Do ye wish to go
round Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh? Can’t ye see the world where
you stand?”

I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; and the
Pequod was as good a ship as any—I thought the best—and all this I now
repeated to Peleg. Seeing me so determined, he expressed his
willingness to ship me.

“And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off,” he added—“come
along with ye.” And so saying, he led the way below deck into the
cabin.

Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and
surprising figure. It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along with
Captain Peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel; the other
shares, as is sometimes the case in these ports, being held by a crowd
of old annuitants; widows, fatherless children, and chancery wards;
each owning about the value of a timber head, or a foot of plank, or a
nail or two in the ship. People in Nantucket invest their money in
whaling vessels, the same way that you do yours in approved state
stocks bringing in good interest.

Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was a
Quaker, the island having been originally settled by that sect; and to
this day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the
peculiarities of the Quaker, only variously and anomalously modified by
things altogether alien and heterogeneous. For some of these same
Quakers are the most sanguinary of all sailors and whale-hunters. They
are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with a vengeance.

So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with
Scripture names—a singularly common fashion on the island—and in
childhood naturally imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of the
Quaker idiom; still, from the audacious, daring, and boundless
adventure of their subsequent lives, strangely blend with these
unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of character, not
unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman. And when
these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force, with a
globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the stillness and
seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest waters, and
beneath constellations never seen here at the north, been led to think
untraditionally and independently; receiving all nature’s sweet or
savage impressions fresh from her own virgin voluntary and confiding
breast, and thereby chiefly, but with some help from accidental
advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty language—that man makes
one in a whole nation’s census—a mighty pageant creature, formed for
noble tragedies. Nor will it at all detract from him, dramatically
regarded, if either by birth or other circumstances, he have what seems
a half wilful overruling morbidness at the bottom of his nature. For
all men tragically great are made so through a certain morbidness. Be
sure of this, O young ambition, all mortal greatness is but disease.
But, as yet we have not to do with such an one, but with quite another;
and still a man, who, if indeed peculiar, it only results again from
another phase of the Quaker, modified by individual circumstances.

Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired whaleman.
But unlike Captain Peleg—who cared not a rush for what are called
serious things, and indeed deemed those self-same serious things the
veriest of all trifles—Captain Bildad had not only been originally
educated according to the strictest sect of Nantucket Quakerism, but
all his subsequent ocean life, and the sight of many unclad, lovely
island creatures, round the Horn—all that had not moved this native
born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as altered one angle of his
vest. Still, for all this immutableness, was there some lack of common
consistency about worthy Captain Bildad. Though refusing, from
conscientious scruples, to bear arms against land invaders, yet himself
had illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn
foe to human bloodshed, yet had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled
tuns upon tuns of leviathan gore. How now in the contemplative evening
of his days, the pious Bildad reconciled these things in the
reminiscence, I do not know; but it did not seem to concern him much,
and very probably he had long since come to the sage and sensible
conclusion that a man’s religion is one thing, and this practical world
quite another. This world pays dividends. Rising from a little
cabin-boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a
broad shad-bellied waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header,
chief-mate, and captain, and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted
before, had concluded his adventurous career by wholly retiring from
active life at the goodly age of sixty, and dedicating his remaining
days to the quiet receiving of his well-earned income.

Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an
incorrigible old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard
task-master. They told me in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a
curious story, that when he sailed the old Categut whaleman, his crew,
upon arriving home, were mostly all carried ashore to the hospital,
sore exhausted and worn out. For a pious man, especially for a Quaker,
he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say the least. He never used
to swear, though, at his men, they said; but somehow he got an
inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work out of them. When
Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-coloured eye intently looking
at you, made you feel completely nervous, till you could clutch
something—a hammer or a marling-spike, and go to work like mad, at
something or other, never mind what. Indolence and idleness perished
before him. His own person was the exact embodiment of his utilitarian
character. On his long, gaunt body, he carried no spare flesh, no
superfluous beard, his chin having a soft, economical nap to it, like
the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.

Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I
followed Captain Peleg down into the cabin. The space between the decks
was small; and there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always sat so,
and never leaned, and this to save his coat tails. His broad-brim was
placed beside him; his legs were stiffly crossed; his drab vesture was
buttoned up to his chin; and spectacles on nose, he seemed absorbed in
reading from a ponderous volume.

“Bildad,” cried Captain Peleg, “at it again, Bildad, eh? Ye have been
studying those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my
certain knowledge. How far ye got, Bildad?”

As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate,
Bildad, without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up,
and seeing me, glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.

“He says he’s our man, Bildad,” said Peleg, “he wants to ship.”

“Dost thee?” said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.

“I _dost_,” said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.

“What do ye think of him, Bildad?” said Peleg.

“He’ll do,” said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at
his book in a mumbling tone quite audible.

I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as Peleg,
his friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer. But I said
nothing, only looking round me sharply. Peleg now threw open a chest,
and drawing forth the ship’s articles, placed pen and ink before him,
and seated himself at a little table. I began to think it was high time
to settle with myself at what terms I would be willing to engage for
the voyage. I was already aware that in the whaling business they paid
no wages; but all hands, including the captain, received certain shares
of the profits called _lays_, and that these lays were proportioned to
the degree of importance pertaining to the respective duties of the
ship’s company. I was also aware that being a green hand at whaling, my
own lay would not be very large; but considering that I was used to the
sea, could steer a ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt
that from all I had heard I should be offered at least the 275th
lay—that is, the 275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage,
whatever that might eventually amount to. And though the 275th lay was
what they call a rather _long lay_, yet it was better than nothing; and
if we had a lucky voyage, might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I
would wear out on it, not to speak of my three years’ beef and board,
for which I would not have to pay one stiver.

It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely
fortune—and so it was, a very poor way indeed. But I am one of those
that never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite content if the
world is ready to board and lodge me, while I am putting up at this
grim sign of the Thunder Cloud. Upon the whole, I thought that the
275th lay would be about the fair thing, but would not have been
surprised had I been offered the 200th, considering I was of a
broad-shouldered make.

But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about
receiving a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had heard
something of both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony Bildad;
how that they being the principal proprietors of the Pequod, therefore
the other and more inconsiderable and scattered owners, left nearly the
whole management of the ship’s affairs to these two. And I did not know
but what the stingy old Bildad might have a mighty deal to say about
shipping hands, especially as I now found him on board the Pequod,
quite at home there in the cabin, and reading his Bible as if at his
own fireside. Now while Peleg was vainly trying to mend a pen with his
jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small surprise, considering that he
was such an interested party in these proceedings; Bildad never heeded
us, but went on mumbling to himself out of his book, “_Lay_ not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth—”

“Well, Captain Bildad,” interrupted Peleg, “what d’ye say, what lay
shall we give this young man?”

“Thou knowest best,” was the sepulchral reply, “the seven hundred and
seventy-seventh wouldn’t be too much, would it?—‘where moth and rust do
corrupt, but _lay_—’”

_Lay_, indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and
seventy-seventh! Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for one,
shall not _lay_ up many _lays_ here below, where moth and rust do
corrupt. It was an exceedingly _long lay_ that, indeed; and though from
the magnitude of the figure it might at first deceive a landsman, yet
the slightest consideration will show that though seven hundred and
seventy-seven is a pretty large number, yet, when you come to make a
_teenth_ of it, you will then see, I say, that the seven hundred and
seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal less than seven
hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thought at the time.

“Why, blast your eyes, Bildad,” cried Peleg, “thou dost not want to
swindle this young man! he must have more than that.”

“Seven hundred and seventy-seventh,” again said Bildad, without lifting
his eyes; and then went on mumbling—“for where your treasure is, there
will your heart be also.”

“I am going to put him down for the three hundredth,” said Peleg, “do
ye hear that, Bildad! The three hundredth lay, I say.”

Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said,
“Captain Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider the
duty thou owest to the other owners of this ship—widows and orphans,
many of them—and that if we too abundantly reward the labors of this
young man, we may be taking the bread from those widows and those
orphans. The seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay, Captain Peleg.”

“Thou Bildad!” roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the
cabin. “Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in these
matters, I would afore now had a conscience to lug about that would be
heavy enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailed round Cape
Horn.”

“Captain Peleg,” said Bildad steadily, “thy conscience may be drawing
ten inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can’t tell; but as thou art
still an impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy
conscience be but a leaky one; and will in the end sink thee foundering
down to the fiery pit, Captain Peleg.”

“Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing, ye
insult me. It’s an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature that
he’s bound to hell. Flukes and flames! Bildad, say that again to me,
and start my soul-bolts, but I’ll—I’ll—yes, I’ll swallow a live goat
with all his hair and horns on. Out of the cabin, ye canting,
drab-coloured son of a wooden gun—a straight wake with ye!”

As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a
marvellous oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded him.

Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and
responsible owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up all
idea of sailing in a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily
commanded, I stepped aside from the door to give egress to Bildad, who,
I made no doubt, was all eagerness to vanish from before the awakened
wrath of Peleg. But to my astonishment, he sat down again on the
transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest intention of
withdrawing. He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg and his ways. As
for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had, there seemed no more
left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb, though he twitched a
little as if still nervously agitated. “Whew!” he whistled at last—“the
squall’s gone off to leeward, I think. Bildad, thou used to be good at
sharpening a lance, mend that pen, will ye. My jack-knife here needs
the grindstone. That’s he; thank ye, Bildad. Now then, my young man,
Ishmael’s thy name, didn’t ye say? Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael,
for the three hundredth lay.”

“Captain Peleg,” said I, “I have a friend with me who wants to ship
too—shall I bring him down to-morrow?”

“To be sure,” said Peleg. “Fetch him along, and we’ll look at him.”

“What lay does he want?” groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book in
which he had again been burying himself.

“Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad,” said Peleg. “Has he ever
whaled it any?” turning to me.

“Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg.”

“Well, bring him along then.”

And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that I
had done a good morning’s work, and that the Pequod was the identical
ship that Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round the Cape.

But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the
Captain with whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though,
indeed, in many cases, a whale-ship will be completely fitted out, and
receive all her crew on board, ere the captain makes himself visible by
arriving to take command; for sometimes these voyages are so prolonged,
and the shore intervals at home so exceedingly brief, that if the
captain have a family, or any absorbing concernment of that sort, he
does not trouble himself much about his ship in port, but leaves her to
the owners till all is ready for sea. However, it is always as well to
have a look at him before irrevocably committing yourself into his
hands. Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg, inquiring where Captain
Ahab was to be found.

“And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab? It’s all right enough; thou
art shipped.”

“Yes, but I should like to see him.”

“But I don’t think thou wilt be able to at present. I don’t know
exactly what’s the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the
house; a sort of sick, and yet he don’t look so. In fact, he ain’t
sick; but no, he isn’t well either. Any how, young man, he won’t always
see me, so I don’t suppose he will thee. He’s a queer man, Captain
Ahab—so some think—but a good one. Oh, thou’lt like him well enough; no
fear, no fear. He’s a grand, ungodly, god-like man, Captain Ahab;
doesn’t speak much; but, when he does speak, then you may well listen.
Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab’s above the common; Ahab’s been in
colleges, as well as ’mong the cannibals; been used to deeper wonders
than the waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier, stranger foes than
whales. His lance! aye, the keenest and the surest that out of all our
isle! Oh! he ain’t Captain Bildad; no, and he ain’t Captain Peleg;
_he’s Ahab_, boy; and Ahab of old, thou knowest, was a crowned king!”

“And a very vile one. When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did
they not lick his blood?”

“Come hither to me—hither, hither,” said Peleg, with a significance in
his eye that almost startled me. “Look ye, lad; never say that on board
the Pequod. Never say it anywhere. Captain Ahab did not name himself.
’Twas a foolish, ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed mother, who died
when he was only a twelvemonth old. And yet the old squaw Tistig, at
Gayhead, said that the name would somehow prove prophetic. And,
perhaps, other fools like her may tell thee the same. I wish to warn
thee. It’s a lie. I know Captain Ahab well; I’ve sailed with him as
mate years ago; I know what he is—a good man—not a pious, good man,
like Bildad, but a swearing good man—something like me—only there’s a
good deal more of him. Aye, aye, I know that he was never very jolly;
and I know that on the passage home, he was a little out of his mind
for a spell; but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump
that brought that about, as any one might see. I know, too, that ever
since he lost his leg last voyage by that accursed whale, he’s been a
kind of moody—desperate moody, and savage sometimes; but that will all
pass off. And once for all, let me tell thee and assure thee, young
man, it’s better to sail with a moody good captain than a laughing bad
one. So good-bye to thee—and wrong not Captain Ahab, because he happens
to have a wicked name. Besides, my boy, he has a wife—not three voyages
wedded—a sweet, resigned girl. Think of that; by that sweet girl that
old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any utter, hopeless harm
in Ahab? No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, if he be, Ahab has his
humanities!”

As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been
incidentally revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain
wild vagueness of painfulness concerning him. And somehow, at the time,
I felt a sympathy and a sorrow for him, but for I don’t know what,
unless it was the cruel loss of his leg. And yet I also felt a strange
awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I cannot at all describe, was
not exactly awe; I do not know what it was. But I felt it; and it did
not disincline me towards him; though I felt impatience at what seemed
like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he was known to me then.
However, my thoughts were at length carried in other directions, so
that for the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.


CHAPTER 17. The Ramadan.

As Queequeg’s Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue all
day, I did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; for I
cherish the greatest respect towards everybody’s religious obligations,
never mind how comical, and could not find it in my heart to undervalue
even a congregation of ants worshipping a toad-stool; or those other
creatures in certain parts of our earth, who with a degree of
footmanism quite unprecedented in other planets, bow down before the
torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on account of the
inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name.

I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these
things, and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals,
pagans and what not, because of their half-crazy conceits on these
subjects. There was Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most
absurd notions about Yojo and his Ramadan;—but what of that? Queequeg
thought he knew what he was about, I suppose; he seemed to be content;
and there let him rest. All our arguing with him would not avail; let
him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us all—Presbyterians and Pagans
alike—for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked about the head, and
sadly need mending.

Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and
rituals must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door;
but no answer. I tried to open it, but it was fastened inside.
“Queequeg,” said I softly through the key-hole:—all silent. “I say,
Queequeg! why don’t you speak? It’s I—Ishmael.” But all remained still
as before. I began to grow alarmed. I had allowed him such abundant
time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit. I looked through
the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner of the room, the
key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one. I could only see
part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall, but nothing
more. I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden
shaft of Queequeg’s harpoon, which the landlady the evening previous
had taken from him, before our mounting to the chamber. That’s strange,
thought I; but at any rate, since the harpoon stands yonder, and he
seldom or never goes abroad without it, therefore he must be inside
here, and no possible mistake.

“Queequeg!—Queequeg!”—all still. Something must have happened.
Apoplexy! I tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly resisted.
Running down stairs, I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person
I met—the chamber-maid. “La! la!” she cried, “I thought something must
be the matter. I went to make the bed after breakfast, and the door was
locked; and not a mouse to be heard; and it’s been just so silent ever
since. But I thought, may be, you had both gone off and locked your
baggage in for safe keeping. La! la, ma’am!—Mistress! murder! Mrs.
Hussey! apoplexy!”—and with these cries, she ran towards the kitchen, I
following.

Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a
vinegar-cruet in the other, having just broken away from the occupation
of attending to the castors, and scolding her little black boy
meantime.

“Wood-house!” cried I, “which way to it? Run for God’s sake, and fetch
something to pry open the door—the axe!—the axe! he’s had a stroke;
depend upon it!”—and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs
again empty-handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and
vinegar-cruet, and the entire castor of her countenance.

“What’s the matter with you, young man?”

“Get the axe! For God’s sake, run for the doctor, some one, while I pry
it open!”

“Look here,” said the landlady, quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet,
so as to have one hand free; “look here; are you talking about prying
open any of my doors?”—and with that she seized my arm. “What’s the
matter with you? What’s the matter with you, shipmate?”

In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand
the whole case. Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of
her nose, she ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed—“No! I haven’t
seen it since I put it there.” Running to a little closet under the
landing of the stairs, she glanced in, and returning, told me that
Queequeg’s harpoon was missing. “He’s killed himself,” she cried. “It’s
unfort’nate Stiggs done over again—there goes another counterpane—God
pity his poor mother!—it will be the ruin of my house. Has the poor lad
a sister? Where’s that girl?—there, Betty, go to Snarles the Painter,
and tell him to paint me a sign, with—“no suicides permitted here, and
no smoking in the parlor;”—might as well kill both birds at once. Kill?
The Lord be merciful to his ghost! What’s that noise there? You, young
man, avast there!”

And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force
open the door.

“I don’t allow it; I won’t have my premises spoiled. Go for the
locksmith, there’s one about a mile from here. But avast!” putting her
hand in her side-pocket, “here’s a key that’ll fit, I guess; let’s
see.” And with that, she turned it in the lock; but, alas! Queequeg’s
supplemental bolt remained unwithdrawn within.

“Have to burst it open,” said I, and was running down the entry a
little, for a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again vowing
I should not break down her premises; but I tore from her, and with a
sudden bodily rush dashed myself full against the mark.

With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming
against the wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, good
heavens! there sat Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected; right
in the middle of the room; squatting on his hams, and holding Yojo on
top of his head. He looked neither one way nor the other way, but sat
like a carved image with scarce a sign of active life.

“Queequeg,” said I, going up to him, “Queequeg, what’s the matter with
you?”

“He hain’t been a sittin’ so all day, has he?” said the landlady.

But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost felt
like pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was almost
intolerable, it seemed so painfully and unnaturally constrained;
especially, as in all probability he had been sitting so for upwards of
eight or ten hours, going too without his regular meals.

“Mrs. Hussey,” said I, “he’s _alive_ at all events; so leave us, if you
please, and I will see to this strange affair myself.”

Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail upon
Queequeg to take a chair; but in vain. There he sat; and all he could
do—for all my polite arts and blandishments—he would not move a peg,
nor say a single word, nor even look at me, nor notice my presence in
the slightest way.

I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan; do
they fast on their hams that way in his native island. It must be so;
yes, it’s part of his creed, I suppose; well, then, let him rest; he’ll
get up sooner or later, no doubt. It can’t last for ever, thank God,
and his Ramadan only comes once a year; and I don’t believe it’s very
punctual then.

I went down to supper. After sitting a long time listening to the long
stories of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding voyage,
as they called it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a schooner or
brig, confined to the north of the line, in the Atlantic Ocean only);
after listening to these plum-puddingers till nearly eleven o’clock, I
went up stairs to go to bed, feeling quite sure by this time Queequeg
must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a termination. But no; there
he was just where I had left him; he had not stirred an inch. I began
to grow vexed with him; it seemed so downright senseless and insane to
be sitting there all day and half the night on his hams in a cold room,
holding a piece of wood on his head.

“For heaven’s sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up and
have some supper. You’ll starve; you’ll kill yourself, Queequeg.” But
not a word did he reply.

Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep;
and no doubt, before a great while, he would follow me. But previous to
turning in, I took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over him, as
it promised to be a very cold night; and he had nothing but his
ordinary round jacket on. For some time, do all I would, I could not
get into the faintest doze. I had blown out the candle; and the mere
thought of Queequeg—not four feet off—sitting there in that uneasy
position, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me really
wretched. Think of it; sleeping all night in the same room with a wide
awake pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable Ramadan!

But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break of
day; when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, as if he
had been screwed down to the floor. But as soon as the first glimpse of
sun entered the window, up he got, with stiff and grating joints, but
with a cheerful look; limped towards me where I lay; pressed his
forehead again against mine; and said his Ramadan was over.

Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person’s religion,
be it what it may, so long as that person does not kill or insult any
other person, because that other person don’t believe it also. But when
a man’s religion becomes really frantic; when it is a positive torment
to him; and, in fine, makes this earth of ours an uncomfortable inn to
lodge in; then I think it high time to take that individual aside and
argue the point with him.

And just so I now did with Queequeg. “Queequeg,” said I, “get into bed
now, and lie and listen to me.” I then went on, beginning with the rise
and progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to the various
religions of the present time, during which time I labored to show
Queequeg that all these Lents, Ramadans, and prolonged ham-squattings
in cold, cheerless rooms were stark nonsense; bad for the health;
useless for the soul; opposed, in short, to the obvious laws of Hygiene
and common sense. I told him, too, that he being in other things such
an extremely sensible and sagacious savage, it pained me, very badly
pained me, to see him now so deplorably foolish about this ridiculous
Ramadan of his. Besides, argued I, fasting makes the body cave in;
hence the spirit caves in; and all thoughts born of a fast must
necessarily be half-starved. This is the reason why most dyspeptic
religionists cherish such melancholy notions about their hereafters. In
one word, Queequeg, said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first
born on an undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated
through the hereditary dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.

I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with
dyspepsia; expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it
in. He said no; only upon one memorable occasion. It was after a great
feast given by his father the king, on the gaining of a great battle
wherein fifty of the enemy had been killed by about two o’clock in the
afternoon, and all cooked and eaten that very evening.

“No more, Queequeg,” said I, shuddering; “that will do;” for I knew the
inferences without his further hinting them. I had seen a sailor who
had visited that very island, and he told me that it was the custom,
when a great battle had been gained there, to barbecue all the slain in
the yard or garden of the victor; and then, one by one, they were
placed in great wooden trenchers, and garnished round like a pilau,
with breadfruit and cocoanuts; and with some parsley in their mouths,
were sent round with the victor’s compliments to all his friends, just
as though these presents were so many Christmas turkeys.

After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made much
impression upon Queequeg. Because, in the first place, he somehow
seemed dull of hearing on that important subject, unless considered
from his own point of view; and, in the second place, he did not more
than one third understand me, couch my ideas simply as I would; and,
finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal more about the true
religion than I did. He looked at me with a sort of condescending
concern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity that such
a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical pagan
piety.

At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously hearty
breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady should not
make much profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out to board the
Pequod, sauntering along, and picking our teeth with halibut bones.


CHAPTER 18. His Mark.

As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship, Queequeg
carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice loudly hailed us
from his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my friend was a cannibal,
and furthermore announcing that he let no cannibals on board that
craft, unless they previously produced their papers.

“What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?” said I, now jumping on the
bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.

“I mean,” he replied, “he must show his papers.”

“Yes,” said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head from
behind Peleg’s, out of the wigwam. “He must show that he’s converted.
Son of darkness,” he added, turning to Queequeg, “art thou at present
in communion with any Christian church?”

“Why,” said I, “he’s a member of the first Congregational Church.” Here
be it said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket ships at
last come to be converted into the churches.

“First Congregational Church,” cried Bildad, “what! that worships in
Deacon Deuteronomy Coleman’s meeting-house?” and so saying, taking out
his spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana
handkerchief, and putting them on very carefully, came out of the
wigwam, and leaning stiffly over the bulwarks, took a good long look at
Queequeg.

“How long hath he been a member?” he then said, turning to me; “not
very long, I rather guess, young man.”

“No,” said Peleg, “and he hasn’t been baptized right either, or it
would have washed some of that devil’s blue off his face.”

“Do tell, now,” cried Bildad, “is this Philistine a regular member of
Deacon Deuteronomy’s meeting? I never saw him going there, and I pass
it every Lord’s day.”

“I don’t know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting,” said
I; “all I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First
Congregational Church. He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is.”

“Young man,” said Bildad sternly, “thou art skylarking with me—explain
thyself, thou young Hittite. What church dost thee mean? answer me.”

Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied. “I mean, sir, the same
ancient Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there,
and Queequeg here, and all of us, and every mother’s son and soul of us
belong; the great and everlasting First Congregation of this whole
worshipping world; we all belong to that; only some of us cherish some
queer crotchets no ways touching the grand belief; in _that_ we all
join hands.”

“Splice, thou mean’st _splice_ hands,” cried Peleg, drawing nearer.
“Young man, you’d better ship for a missionary, instead of a fore-mast
hand; I never heard a better sermon. Deacon Deuteronomy—why Father
Mapple himself couldn’t beat it, and he’s reckoned something. Come
aboard, come aboard; never mind about the papers. I say, tell Quohog
there—what’s that you call him? tell Quohog to step along. By the great
anchor, what a harpoon he’s got there! looks like good stuff that; and
he handles it about right. I say, Quohog, or whatever your name is, did
you ever stand in the head of a whale-boat? did you ever strike a
fish?”

Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon
the bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats
hanging to the side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his
harpoon, cried out in some such way as this:—

“Cap’ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere? You see him? well,
spose him one whale eye, well, den!” and taking sharp aim at it, he
darted the iron right over old Bildad’s broad brim, clean across the
ship’s decks, and struck the glistening tar spot out of sight.

“Now,” said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, “spos-ee him whale-e
eye; why, dad whale dead.”

“Quick, Bildad,” said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the close
vicinity of the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin
gangway. “Quick, I say, you Bildad, and get the ship’s papers. We must
have Hedgehog there, I mean Quohog, in one of our boats. Look ye,
Quohog, we’ll give ye the ninetieth lay, and that’s more than ever was
given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket.”

So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon
enrolled among the same ship’s company to which I myself belonged.

When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for
signing, he turned to me and said, “I guess, Quohog there don’t know
how to write, does he? I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign thy name
or make thy mark?”

But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken
part in similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking the
offered pen, copied upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact
counterpart of a queer round figure which was tattooed upon his arm; so
that through Captain Peleg’s obstinate mistake touching his
appellative, it stood something like this:—

Quohog. his X mark.

Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg,
and at last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his
broad-skirted drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts, and selecting one
entitled “The Latter Day Coming; or No Time to Lose,” placed it in
Queequeg’s hands, and then grasping them and the book with both his,
looked earnestly into his eyes, and said, “Son of darkness, I must do
my duty by thee; I am part owner of this ship, and feel concerned for
the souls of all its crew; if thou still clingest to thy Pagan ways,
which I sadly fear, I beseech thee, remain not for aye a Belial
bondsman. Spurn the idol Bell, and the hideous dragon; turn from the
wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say; oh! goodness gracious! steer
clear of the fiery pit!”

Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad’s language,
heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.

“Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our harpooneer,”
cried Peleg. “Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers—it takes the
shark out of ’em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty
sharkish. There was young Nat Swaine, once the bravest boat-header out
of all Nantucket and the Vineyard; he joined the meeting, and never
came to good. He got so frightened about his plaguy soul, that he
shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear of after-claps, in case
he got stove and went to Davy Jones.”

“Peleg! Peleg!” said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, “thou thyself,
as I myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest, Peleg, what
it is to have the fear of death; how, then, can’st thou prate in this
ungodly guise. Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg. Tell me, when this
same Pequod here had her three masts overboard in that typhoon on
Japan, that same voyage when thou went mate with Captain Ahab, did’st
thou not think of Death and the Judgment then?”

“Hear him, hear him now,” cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, and
thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,—“hear him, all of ye.
Think of that! When every moment we thought the ship would sink! Death
and the Judgment then? What? With all three masts making such an
everlasting thundering against the side; and every sea breaking over
us, fore and aft. Think of Death and the Judgment then? No! no time to
think about Death then. Life was what Captain Ahab and I was thinking
of; and how to save all hands—how to rig jury-masts—how to get into the
nearest port; that was what I was thinking of.”

Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck, where
we followed him. There he stood, very quietly overlooking some
sailmakers who were mending a top-sail in the waist. Now and then he
stooped to pick up a patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which
otherwise might have been wasted.


CHAPTER 19. The Prophet.

“Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?”

Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from
the water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when the
above words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us,
levelled his massive forefinger at the vessel in question. He was but
shabbily apparelled in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag of a
black handkerchief investing his neck. A confluent small-pox had in all
directions flowed over his face, and left it like the complicated
ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing waters have been dried up.

“Have ye shipped in her?” he repeated.

“You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose,” said I, trying to gain a little
more time for an uninterrupted look at him.

“Aye, the Pequod—that ship there,” he said, drawing back his whole arm,
and then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the fixed
bayonet of his pointed finger darted full at the object.

“Yes,” said I, “we have just signed the articles.”

“Anything down there about your souls?”

“About what?”

“Oh, perhaps you hav’n’t got any,” he said quickly. “No matter though,
I know many chaps that hav’n’t got any,—good luck to ’em; and they are
all the better off for it. A soul’s a sort of a fifth wheel to a
wagon.”

“What are you jabbering about, shipmate?” said I.

“_He’s_ got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of that
sort in other chaps,” abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous
emphasis upon the word _he_.

“Queequeg,” said I, “let’s go; this fellow has broken loose from
somewhere; he’s talking about something and somebody we don’t know.”

“Stop!” cried the stranger. “Ye said true—ye hav’n’t seen Old Thunder
yet, have ye?”

“Who’s Old Thunder?” said I, again riveted with the insane earnestness
of his manner.

“Captain Ahab.”

“What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?”

“Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name. Ye
hav’n’t seen him yet, have ye?”

“No, we hav’n’t. He’s sick they say, but is getting better, and will be
all right again before long.”

“All right again before long!” laughed the stranger, with a solemnly
derisive sort of laugh. “Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right, then
this left arm of mine will be all right; not before.”

“What do you know about him?”

“What did they _tell_ you about him? Say that!”

“They didn’t tell much of anything about him; only I’ve heard that he’s
a good whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew.”

“That’s true, that’s true—yes, both true enough. But you must jump when
he gives an order. Step and growl; growl and go—that’s the word with
Captain Ahab. But nothing about that thing that happened to him off
Cape Horn, long ago, when he lay like dead for three days and nights;
nothing about that deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard afore the altar
in Santa?—heard nothing about that, eh? Nothing about the silver
calabash he spat into? And nothing about his losing his leg last
voyage, according to the prophecy. Didn’t ye hear a word about them
matters and something more, eh? No, I don’t think ye did; how could ye?
Who knows it? Not all Nantucket, I guess. But hows’ever, mayhap, ye’ve
heard tell about the leg, and how he lost it; aye, ye have heard of
that, I dare say. Oh yes, _that_ every one knows a’most—I mean they
know he’s only one leg; and that a parmacetti took the other off.”

“My friend,” said I, “what all this gibberish of yours is about, I
don’t know, and I don’t much care; for it seems to me that you must be
a little damaged in the head. But if you are speaking of Captain Ahab,
of that ship there, the Pequod, then let me tell you, that I know all
about the loss of his leg.”

“_All_ about it, eh—sure you do?—all?”

“Pretty sure.”

With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like
stranger stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting a
little, turned and said:—“Ye’ve shipped, have ye? Names down on the
papers? Well, well, what’s signed, is signed; and what’s to be, will
be; and then again, perhaps it won’t be, after all. Anyhow, it’s all
fixed and arranged a’ready; and some sailors or other must go with him,
I suppose; as well these as any other men, God pity ’em! Morning to ye,
shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless ye; I’m sorry I stopped
ye.”

“Look here, friend,” said I, “if you have anything important to tell
us, out with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are
mistaken in your game; that’s all I have to say.”

“And it’s said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way;
you are just the man for him—the likes of ye. Morning to ye, shipmates,
morning! Oh! when ye get there, tell ’em I’ve concluded not to make one
of ’em.”

“Ah, my dear fellow, you can’t fool us that way—you can’t fool us. It
is the easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a
great secret in him.”

“Morning to ye, shipmates, morning.”

“Morning it is,” said I. “Come along, Queequeg, let’s leave this crazy
man. But stop, tell me your name, will you?”

“Elijah.”

Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after each
other’s fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was
nothing but a humbug, trying to be a bugbear. But we had not gone
perhaps above a hundred yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and
looking back as I did so, who should be seen but Elijah following us,
though at a distance. Somehow, the sight of him struck me so, that I
said nothing to Queequeg of his being behind, but passed on with my
comrade, anxious to see whether the stranger would turn the same corner
that we did. He did; and then it seemed to me that he was dogging us,
but with what intent I could not for the life of me imagine. This
circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous, half-hinting, half-revealing,
shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me all kinds of vague wonderments
and half-apprehensions, and all connected with the Pequod; and Captain
Ahab; and the leg he had lost; and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver
calabash; and what Captain Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship
the day previous; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig; and the
voyage we had bound ourselves to sail; and a hundred other shadowy
things.

I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was really
dogging us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg,
and on that side of it retraced our steps. But Elijah passed on,
without seeming to notice us. This relieved me; and once more, and
finally as it seemed to me, I pronounced him in my heart, a humbug.


CHAPTER 20. All Astir.

A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod.
Not only were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming on
board, and bolts of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short, everything
betokened that the ship’s preparations were hurrying to a close.
Captain Peleg seldom or never went ashore, but sat in his wigwam
keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands: Bildad did all the purchasing
and providing at the stores; and the men employed in the hold and on
the rigging were working till long after night-fall.

On the day following Queequeg’s signing the articles, word was given at
all the inns where the ship’s company were stopping, that their chests
must be on board before night, for there was no telling how soon the
vessel might be sailing. So Queequeg and I got down our traps,
resolving, however, to sleep ashore till the last. But it seems they
always give very long notice in these cases, and the ship did not sail
for several days. But no wonder; there was a good deal to be done, and
there is no telling how many things to be thought of, before the Pequod
was fully equipped.

Every one knows what a multitude of things—beds, sauce-pans, knives and
forks, shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not, are
indispensable to the business of housekeeping. Just so with whaling,
which necessitates a three-years’ housekeeping upon the wide ocean, far
from all grocers, costermongers, doctors, bakers, and bankers. And
though this also holds true of merchant vessels, yet not by any means
to the same extent as with whalemen. For besides the great length of
the whaling voyage, the numerous articles peculiar to the prosecution
of the fishery, and the impossibility of replacing them at the remote
harbors usually frequented, it must be remembered, that of all ships,
whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds, and
especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which
the success of the voyage most depends. Hence, the spare boats, spare
spars, and spare lines and harpoons, and spare everythings, almost, but
a spare Captain and duplicate ship.

At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage of the
Pequod had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread, water,
fuel, and iron hoops and staves. But, as before hinted, for some time
there was a continual fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and
ends of things, both large and small.

Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain
Bildad’s sister, a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable
spirit, but withal very kindhearted, who seemed resolved that, if _she_
could help it, nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod, after
once fairly getting to sea. At one time she would come on board with a
jar of pickles for the steward’s pantry; another time with a bunch of
quills for the chief mate’s desk, where he kept his log; a third time
with a roll of flannel for the small of some one’s rheumatic back.
Never did any woman better deserve her name, which was Charity—Aunt
Charity, as everybody called her. And like a sister of charity did this
charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither, ready to turn
her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety, comfort,
and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother
Bildad was concerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two of
well-saved dollars.

But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on
board, as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand, and
a still longer whaling lance in the other. Nor was Bildad himself nor
Captain Peleg at all backward. As for Bildad, he carried about with him
a long list of the articles needed, and at every fresh arrival, down
went his mark opposite that article upon the paper. Every once in a
while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone den, roaring at the men
down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at the mast-head, and
then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.

During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the
craft, and as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and
when he was going to come on board his ship. To these questions they
would answer, that he was getting better and better, and was expected
aboard every day; meantime, the two captains, Peleg and Bildad, could
attend to everything necessary to fit the vessel for the voyage. If I
had been downright honest with myself, I would have seen very plainly
in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed this way to so
long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who was to be the
absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out upon the open
sea. But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes happens that if he
be already involved in the matter, he insensibly strives to cover up
his suspicions even from himself. And much this way it was with me. I
said nothing, and tried to think nothing.

At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would
certainly sail. So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very early
start.


CHAPTER 21. Going Aboard.

It was nearly six o’clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, when we
drew nigh the wharf.

“There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right,” said I to
Queequeg, “it can’t be shadows; she’s off by sunrise, I guess; come
on!”

“Avast!” cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming close
behind us, laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuating
himself between us, stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertain
twilight, strangely peering from Queequeg to me. It was Elijah.

“Going aboard?”

“Hands off, will you,” said I.

“Lookee here,” said Queequeg, shaking himself, “go ’way!”

“Ain’t going aboard, then?”

“Yes, we are,” said I, “but what business is that of yours? Do you
know, Mr. Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?”

“No, no, no; I wasn’t aware of that,” said Elijah, slowly and
wonderingly looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable
glances.

“Elijah,” said I, “you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing. We
are going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer not to be
detained.”

“Ye be, be ye? Coming back afore breakfast?”

“He’s cracked, Queequeg,” said I, “come on.”

“Holloa!” cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a few
paces.

“Never mind him,” said I, “Queequeg, come on.”

But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on my
shoulder, said—“Did ye see anything looking like men going towards that
ship a while ago?”

Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying, “Yes,
I thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be sure.”

“Very dim, very dim,” said Elijah. “Morning to ye.”

Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; and
touching my shoulder again, said, “See if you can find ’em now, will
ye?

“Find who?”

“Morning to ye! morning to ye!” he rejoined, again moving off. “Oh! I
was going to warn ye against—but never mind, never mind—it’s all one,
all in the family too;—sharp frost this morning, ain’t it? Good-bye to
ye. Shan’t see ye again very soon, I guess; unless it’s before the
Grand Jury.” And with these cracked words he finally departed, leaving
me, for the moment, in no small wonderment at his frantic impudence.

At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything in profound
quiet, not a soul moving. The cabin entrance was locked within; the
hatches were all on, and lumbered with coils of rigging. Going forward
to the forecastle, we found the slide of the scuttle open. Seeing a
light, we went down, and found only an old rigger there, wrapped in a
tattered pea-jacket. He was thrown at whole length upon two chests, his
face downwards and inclosed in his folded arms. The profoundest slumber
slept upon him.

“Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?” said I,
looking dubiously at the sleeper. But it seemed that, when on the
wharf, Queequeg had not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence I
would have thought myself to have been optically deceived in that
matter, were it not for Elijah’s otherwise inexplicable question. But I
beat the thing down; and again marking the sleeper, jocularly hinted to
Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with the body; telling him to
establish himself accordingly. He put his hand upon the sleeper’s rear,
as though feeling if it was soft enough; and then, without more ado,
sat quietly down there.

“Gracious! Queequeg, don’t sit there,” said I.

“Oh! perry dood seat,” said Queequeg, “my country way; won’t hurt him
face.”

“Face!” said I, “call that his face? very benevolent countenance then;
but how hard he breathes, he’s heaving himself; get off, Queequeg, you
are heavy, it’s grinding the face of the poor. Get off, Queequeg! Look,
he’ll twitch you off soon. I wonder he don’t wake.”

Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and
lighted his tomahawk pipe. I sat at the feet. We kept the pipe passing
over the sleeper, from one to the other. Meanwhile, upon questioning
him in his broken fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand that, in his
land, owing to the absence of settees and sofas of all sorts, the king,
chiefs, and great people generally, were in the custom of fattening
some of the lower orders for ottomans; and to furnish a house
comfortably in that respect, you had only to buy up eight or ten lazy
fellows, and lay them round in the piers and alcoves. Besides, it was
very convenient on an excursion; much better than those garden-chairs
which are convertible into walking-sticks; upon occasion, a chief
calling his attendant, and desiring him to make a settee of himself
under a spreading tree, perhaps in some damp marshy place.

While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received the tomahawk
from me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper’s head.

“What’s that for, Queequeg?”

“Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!”

He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe,
which, it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed
his soul, when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger. The
strong vapor now completely filling the contracted hole, it began to
tell upon him. He breathed with a sort of muffledness; then seemed
troubled in the nose; then revolved over once or twice; then sat up and
rubbed his eyes.

“Holloa!” he breathed at last, “who be ye smokers?”

“Shipped men,” answered I, “when does she sail?”

“Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye? She sails to-day. The Captain
came aboard last night.”

“What Captain?—Ahab?”

“Who but him indeed?”

I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, when we
heard a noise on deck.

“Holloa! Starbuck’s astir,” said the rigger. “He’s a lively chief mate,
that; good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn to.” And so
saying he went on deck, and we followed.

It was now clear sunrise. Soon the crew came on board in twos and
threes; the riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were actively
engaged; and several of the shore people were busy in bringing various
last things on board. Meanwhile Captain Ahab remained invisibly
enshrined within his cabin.


CHAPTER 22. Merry Christmas.

At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship’s
riggers, and after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and
after the ever-thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with
her last gift—a night-cap for Stubb, the second mate, her
brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the steward—after all this, the
two Captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the cabin, and turning to
the chief mate, Peleg said:

“Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right? Captain Ahab is
all ready—just spoke to him—nothing more to be got from shore, eh?
Well, call all hands, then. Muster ’em aft here—blast ’em!”

“No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg,” said
Bildad, “but away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding.”

How now! Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage, Captain
Peleg and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the
quarter-deck, just as if they were to be joint-commanders at sea, as
well as to all appearances in port. And, as for Captain Ahab, no sign
of him was yet to be seen; only, they said he was in the cabin. But
then, the idea was, that his presence was by no means necessary in
getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to sea. Indeed,
as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot’s; and as he
was not yet completely recovered—so they said—therefore, Captain Ahab
stayed below. And all this seemed natural enough; especially as in the
merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a
considerable time after heaving up the anchor, but remain over the
cabin table, having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends,
before they quit the ship for good with the pilot.

But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain
Peleg was now all alive. He seemed to do most of the talking and
commanding, and not Bildad.

“Aft here, ye sons of bachelors,” he cried, as the sailors lingered at
the main-mast. “Mr. Starbuck, drive ’em aft.”

“Strike the tent there!”—was the next order. As I hinted before, this
whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on board the
Pequod, for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was well known
to be the next thing to heaving up the anchor.

“Man the capstan! Blood and thunder!—jump!”—was the next command, and
the crew sprang for the handspikes.

Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the pilot
is the forward part of the ship. And here Bildad, who, with Peleg, be
it known, in addition to his other officers, was one of the licensed
pilots of the port—he being suspected to have got himself made a pilot
in order to save the Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was
concerned in, for he never piloted any other craft—Bildad, I say, might
now be seen actively engaged in looking over the bows for the
approaching anchor, and at intervals singing what seemed a dismal stave
of psalmody, to cheer the hands at the windlass, who roared forth some
sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley, with hearty good
will. Nevertheless, not three days previous, Bildad had told them that
no profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod, particularly in
getting under weigh; and Charity, his sister, had placed a small choice
copy of Watts in each seaman’s berth.

Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg ripped
and swore astern in the most frightful manner. I almost thought he
would sink the ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily I
paused on my handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking of
the perils we both ran, in starting on the voyage with such a devil for
a pilot. I was comforting myself, however, with the thought that in
pious Bildad might be found some salvation, spite of his seven hundred
and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a sudden sharp poke in my rear,
and turning round, was horrified at the apparition of Captain Peleg in
the act of withdrawing his leg from my immediate vicinity. That was my
first kick.

“Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?” he roared.
“Spring, thou sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone! Why don’t ye
spring, I say, all of ye—spring! Quohog! spring, thou chap with the red
whiskers; spring there, Scotch-cap; spring, thou green pants. Spring, I
say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out!” And so saying, he moved
along the windlass, here and there using his leg very freely, while
imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with his psalmody. Thinks I,
Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-day.

At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided. It
was a short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day merged into
night, we found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean, whose
freezing spray cased us in ice, as in polished armor. The long rows of
teeth on the bulwarks glistened in the moonlight; and like the white
ivory tusks of some huge elephant, vast curving icicles depended from
the bows.

Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as
the old craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering
frost all over her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his
steady notes were heard,—


_“Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood, Stand dressed in living
green. So to the Jews old Canaan stood, While Jordan rolled between.”_



Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then. They
were full of hope and fruition. Spite of this frigid winter night in
the boisterous Atlantic, spite of my wet feet and wetter jacket, there
was yet, it then seemed to me, many a pleasant haven in store; and
meads and glades so eternally vernal, that the grass shot up by the
spring, untrodden, unwilted, remains at midsummer.

At last we gained such an offing, that the two pilots were needed no
longer. The stout sail-boat that had accompanied us began ranging
alongside.

It was curious and not unpleasing, how Peleg and Bildad were affected
at this juncture, especially Captain Bildad. For loath to depart, yet;
very loath to leave, for good, a ship bound on so long and perilous a
voyage—beyond both stormy Capes; a ship in which some thousands of his
hard earned dollars were invested; a ship, in which an old shipmate
sailed as captain; a man almost as old as he, once more starting to
encounter all the terrors of the pitiless jaw; loath to say good-bye to
a thing so every way brimful of every interest to him,—poor old Bildad
lingered long; paced the deck with anxious strides; ran down into the
cabin to speak another farewell word there; again came on deck, and
looked to windward; looked towards the wide and endless waters, only
bounded by the far-off unseen Eastern Continents; looked towards the
land; looked aloft; looked right and left; looked everywhere and
nowhere; and at last, mechanically coiling a rope upon its pin,
convulsively grasped stout Peleg by the hand, and holding up a lantern,
for a moment stood gazing heroically in his face, as much as to say,
“Nevertheless, friend Peleg, I can stand it; yes, I can.”

As for Peleg himself, he took it more like a philosopher; but for all
his philosophy, there was a tear twinkling in his eye, when the lantern
came too near. And he, too, did not a little run from cabin to deck—now
a word below, and now a word with Starbuck, the chief mate.

But, at last, he turned to his comrade, with a final sort of look about
him,—“Captain Bildad—come, old shipmate, we must go. Back the main-yard
there! Boat ahoy! Stand by to come close alongside, now! Careful,
careful!—come, Bildad, boy—say your last. Luck to ye, Starbuck—luck to
ye, Mr. Stubb—luck to ye, Mr. Flask—good-bye and good luck to ye
all—and this day three years I’ll have a hot supper smoking for ye in
old Nantucket. Hurrah and away!”

“God bless ye, and have ye in His holy keeping, men,” murmured old
Bildad, almost incoherently. “I hope ye’ll have fine weather now, so
that Captain Ahab may soon be moving among ye—a pleasant sun is all he
needs, and ye’ll have plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go. Be
careful in the hunt, ye mates. Don’t stave the boats needlessly, ye
harpooneers; good white cedar plank is raised full three per cent.
within the year. Don’t forget your prayers, either. Mr. Starbuck, mind
that cooper don’t waste the spare staves. Oh! the sail-needles are in
the green locker! Don’t whale it too much a’ Lord’s days, men; but
don’t miss a fair chance either, that’s rejecting Heaven’s good gifts.
Have an eye to the molasses tierce, Mr. Stubb; it was a little leaky, I
thought. If ye touch at the islands, Mr. Flask, beware of fornication.
Good-bye, good-bye! Don’t keep that cheese too long down in the hold,
Mr. Starbuck; it’ll spoil. Be careful with the butter—twenty cents the
pound it was, and mind ye, if—”

“Come, come, Captain Bildad; stop palavering,—away!” and with that,
Peleg hurried him over the side, and both dropt into the boat.

Ship and boat diverged; the cold, damp night breeze blew between; a
screaming gull flew overhead; the two hulls wildly rolled; we gave
three heavy-hearted cheers, and blindly plunged like fate into the lone
Atlantic.


CHAPTER 23. The Lee Shore.

Some chapters back, one Bulkington was spoken of, a tall, newlanded
mariner, encountered in New Bedford at the inn.

When on that shivering winter’s night, the Pequod thrust her vindictive
bows into the cold malicious waves, who should I see standing at her
helm but Bulkington! I looked with sympathetic awe and fearfulness upon
the man, who in mid-winter just landed from a four years’ dangerous
voyage, could so unrestingly push off again for still another
tempestuous term. The land seemed scorching to his feet. Wonderfullest
things are ever the unmentionable; deep memories yield no epitaphs;
this six-inch chapter is the stoneless grave of Bulkington. Let me only
say that it fared with him as with the storm-tossed ship, that
miserably drives along the leeward land. The port would fain give
succor; the port is pitiful; in the port is safety, comfort,
hearthstone, supper, warm blankets, friends, all that’s kind to our
mortalities. But in that gale, the port, the land, is that ship’s
direst jeopardy; she must fly all hospitality; one touch of land,
though it but graze the keel, would make her shudder through and
through. With all her might she crowds all sail off shore; in so doing,
fights ’gainst the very winds that fain would blow her homeward; seeks
all the lashed sea’s landlessness again; for refuge’s sake forlornly
rushing into peril; her only friend her bitterest foe!

Know ye now, Bulkington? Glimpses do ye seem to see of that mortally
intolerable truth; that all deep, earnest thinking is but the intrepid
effort of the soul to keep the open independence of her sea; while the
wildest winds of heaven and earth conspire to cast her on the
treacherous, slavish shore?

But as in landlessness alone resides highest truth, shoreless,
indefinite as God—so, better is it to perish in that howling infinite,
than be ingloriously dashed upon the lee, even if that were safety! For
worm-like, then, oh! who would craven crawl to land! Terrors of the
terrible! is all this agony so vain? Take heart, take heart, O
Bulkington! Bear thee grimly, demigod! Up from the spray of thy
ocean-perishing—straight up, leaps thy apotheosis!


CHAPTER 24. The Advocate.

As Queequeg and I are now fairly embarked in this business of whaling;
and as this business of whaling has somehow come to be regarded among
landsmen as a rather unpoetical and disreputable pursuit; therefore, I
am all anxiety to convince ye, ye landsmen, of the injustice hereby
done to us hunters of whales.

In the first place, it may be deemed almost superfluous to establish
the fact, that among people at large, the business of whaling is not
accounted on a level with what are called the liberal professions. If a
stranger were introduced into any miscellaneous metropolitan society,
it would but slightly advance the general opinion of his merits, were
he presented to the company as a harpooneer, say; and if in emulation
of the naval officers he should append the initials S.W.F. (Sperm Whale
Fishery) to his visiting card, such a procedure would be deemed
pre-eminently presuming and ridiculous.

Doubtless one leading reason why the world declines honoring us
whalemen, is this: they think that, at best, our vocation amounts to a
butchering sort of business; and that when actively engaged therein, we
are surrounded by all manner of defilements. Butchers we are, that is
true. But butchers, also, and butchers of the bloodiest badge have been
all Martial Commanders whom the world invariably delights to honor. And
as for the matter of the alleged uncleanliness of our business, ye
shall soon be initiated into certain facts hitherto pretty generally
unknown, and which, upon the whole, will triumphantly plant the sperm
whale-ship at least among the cleanliest things of this tidy earth. But
even granting the charge in question to be true; what disordered
slippery decks of a whale-ship are comparable to the unspeakable
carrion of those battle-fields from which so many soldiers return to
drink in all ladies’ plaudits? And if the idea of peril so much
enhances the popular conceit of the soldier’s profession; let me assure
ye that many a veteran who has freely marched up to a battery, would
quickly recoil at the apparition of the sperm whale’s vast tail,
fanning into eddies the air over his head. For what are the
comprehensible terrors of man compared with the interlinked terrors and
wonders of God!

But, though the world scouts at us whale hunters, yet does it
unwittingly pay us the profoundest homage; yea, an all-abounding
adoration! for almost all the tapers, lamps, and candles that burn
round the globe, burn, as before so many shrines, to our glory!

But look at this matter in other lights; weigh it in all sorts of
scales; see what we whalemen are, and have been.

Why did the Dutch in De Witt’s time have admirals of their whaling
fleets? Why did Louis XVI. of France, at his own personal expense, fit
out whaling ships from Dunkirk, and politely invite to that town some
score or two of families from our own island of Nantucket? Why did
Britain between the years 1750 and 1788 pay to her whalemen in bounties
upwards of £1,000,000? And lastly, how comes it that we whalemen of
America now outnumber all the rest of the banded whalemen in the world;
sail a navy of upwards of seven hundred vessels; manned by eighteen
thousand men; yearly consuming 4,000,000 of dollars; the ships worth,
at the time of sailing, $20,000,000! and every year importing into our
harbors a well reaped harvest of $7,000,000. How comes all this, if
there be not something puissant in whaling?

But this is not the half; look again.

I freely assert, that the cosmopolite philosopher cannot, for his life,
point out one single peaceful influence, which within the last sixty
years has operated more potentially upon the whole broad world, taken
in one aggregate, than the high and mighty business of whaling. One way
and another, it has begotten events so remarkable in themselves, and so
continuously momentous in their sequential issues, that whaling may
well be regarded as that Egyptian mother, who bore offspring themselves
pregnant from her womb. It would be a hopeless, endless task to
catalogue all these things. Let a handful suffice. For many years past
the whale-ship has been the pioneer in ferreting out the remotest and
least known parts of the earth. She has explored seas and archipelagoes
which had no chart, where no Cook or Vancouver had ever sailed. If
American and European men-of-war now peacefully ride in once savage
harbors, let them fire salutes to the honor and glory of the
whale-ship, which originally showed them the way, and first interpreted
between them and the savages. They may celebrate as they will the
heroes of Exploring Expeditions, your Cooks, your Krusensterns; but I
say that scores of anonymous Captains have sailed out of Nantucket,
that were as great, and greater than your Cook and your Krusenstern.
For in their succourless empty-handedness, they, in the heathenish
sharked waters, and by the beaches of unrecorded, javelin islands,
battled with virgin wonders and terrors that Cook with all his marines
and muskets would not willingly have dared. All that is made such a
flourish of in the old South Sea Voyages, those things were but the
life-time commonplaces of our heroic Nantucketers. Often, adventures
which Vancouver dedicates three chapters to, these men accounted
unworthy of being set down in the ship’s common log. Ah, the world! Oh,
the world!

Until the whale fishery rounded Cape Horn, no commerce but colonial,
scarcely any intercourse but colonial, was carried on between Europe
and the long line of the opulent Spanish provinces on the Pacific
coast. It was the whaleman who first broke through the jealous policy
of the Spanish crown, touching those colonies; and, if space permitted,
it might be distinctly shown how from those whalemen at last eventuated
the liberation of Peru, Chili, and Bolivia from the yoke of Old Spain,
and the establishment of the eternal democracy in those parts.

That great America on the other side of the sphere, Australia, was
given to the enlightened world by the whaleman. After its first
blunder-born discovery by a Dutchman, all other ships long shunned
those shores as pestiferously barbarous; but the whale-ship touched
there. The whale-ship is the true mother of that now mighty colony.
Moreover, in the infancy of the first Australian settlement, the
emigrants were several times saved from starvation by the benevolent
biscuit of the whale-ship luckily dropping an anchor in their waters.
The uncounted isles of all Polynesia confess the same truth, and do
commercial homage to the whale-ship, that cleared the way for the
missionary and the merchant, and in many cases carried the primitive
missionaries to their first destinations. If that double-bolted land,
Japan, is ever to become hospitable, it is the whale-ship alone to whom
the credit will be due; for already she is on the threshold.

But if, in the face of all this, you still declare that whaling has no
æsthetically noble associations connected with it, then am I ready to
shiver fifty lances with you there, and unhorse you with a split helmet
every time.

The whale has no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler, you
will say.

_The whale no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler?_ Who
wrote the first account of our Leviathan? Who but mighty Job! And who
composed the first narrative of a whaling-voyage? Who, but no less a
prince than Alfred the Great, who, with his own royal pen, took down
the words from Other, the Norwegian whale-hunter of those times! And
who pronounced our glowing eulogy in Parliament? Who, but Edmund Burke!

True enough, but then whalemen themselves are poor devils; they have no
good blood in their veins.

_No good blood in their veins?_ They have something better than royal
blood there. The grandmother of Benjamin Franklin was Mary Morrel;
afterwards, by marriage, Mary Folger, one of the old settlers of
Nantucket, and the ancestress to a long line of Folgers and
harpooneers—all kith and kin to noble Benjamin—this day darting the
barbed iron from one side of the world to the other.

Good again; but then all confess that somehow whaling is not
respectable.

_Whaling not respectable?_ Whaling is imperial! By old English
statutory law, the whale is declared “a royal fish.” *

Oh, that’s only nominal! The whale himself has never figured in any
grand imposing way.

_The whale never figured in any grand imposing way?_ In one of the
mighty triumphs given to a Roman general upon his entering the world’s
capital, the bones of a whale, brought all the way from the Syrian
coast, were the most conspicuous object in the cymballed procession.*

*See subsequent chapters for something more on this head.

Grant it, since you cite it; but, say what you will, there is no real
dignity in whaling.

_No dignity in whaling?_ The dignity of our calling the very heavens
attest. Cetus is a constellation in the South! No more! Drive down your
hat in presence of the Czar, and take it off to Queequeg! No more! I
know a man that, in his lifetime, has taken three hundred and fifty
whales. I account that man more honorable than that great captain of
antiquity who boasted of taking as many walled towns.

And, as for me, if, by any possibility, there be any as yet
undiscovered prime thing in me; if I shall ever deserve any real repute
in that small but high hushed world which I might not be unreasonably
ambitious of; if hereafter I shall do anything that, upon the whole, a
man might rather have done than to have left undone; if, at my death,
my executors, or more properly my creditors, find any precious MSS. in
my desk, then here I prospectively ascribe all the honor and the glory
to whaling; for a whale-ship was my Yale College and my Harvard.


CHAPTER 25. Postscript.

In behalf of the dignity of whaling, I would fain advance naught but
substantiated facts. But after embattling his facts, an advocate who
should wholly suppress a not unreasonable surmise, which might tell
eloquently upon his cause—such an advocate, would he not be
blameworthy?

It is well known that at the coronation of kings and queens, even
modern ones, a certain curious process of seasoning them for their
functions is gone through. There is a saltcellar of state, so called,
and there may be a castor of state. How they use the salt,
precisely—who knows? Certain I am, however, that a king’s head is
solemnly oiled at his coronation, even as a head of salad. Can it be,
though, that they anoint it with a view of making its interior run
well, as they anoint machinery? Much might be ruminated here,
concerning the essential dignity of this regal process, because in
common life we esteem but meanly and contemptibly a fellow who anoints
his hair, and palpably smells of that anointing. In truth, a mature man
who uses hair-oil, unless medicinally, that man has probably got a
quoggy spot in him somewhere. As a general rule, he can’t amount to
much in his totality.

But the only thing to be considered here, is this—what kind of oil is
used at coronations? Certainly it cannot be olive oil, nor macassar
oil, nor castor oil, nor bear’s oil, nor train oil, nor cod-liver oil.
What then can it possibly be, but sperm oil in its unmanufactured,
unpolluted state, the sweetest of all oils?

Think of that, ye loyal Britons! we whalemen supply your kings and
queens with coronation stuff!


CHAPTER 26. Knights and Squires.

The chief mate of the Pequod was Starbuck, a native of Nantucket, and a
Quaker by descent. He was a long, earnest man, and though born on an
icy coast, seemed well adapted to endure hot latitudes, his flesh being
hard as twice-baked biscuit. Transported to the Indies, his live blood
would not spoil like bottled ale. He must have been born in some time
of general drought and famine, or upon one of those fast days for which
his state is famous. Only some thirty arid summers had he seen; those
summers had dried up all his physical superfluousness. But this, his
thinness, so to speak, seemed no more the token of wasting anxieties
and cares, than it seemed the indication of any bodily blight. It was
merely the condensation of the man. He was by no means ill-looking;
quite the contrary. His pure tight skin was an excellent fit; and
closely wrapped up in it, and embalmed with inner health and strength,
like a revivified Egyptian, this Starbuck seemed prepared to endure for
long ages to come, and to endure always, as now; for be it Polar snow
or torrid sun, like a patent chronometer, his interior vitality was
warranted to do well in all climates. Looking into his eyes, you seemed
to see there the yet lingering images of those thousand-fold perils he
had calmly confronted through life. A staid, steadfast man, whose life
for the most part was a telling pantomime of action, and not a tame
chapter of sounds. Yet, for all his hardy sobriety and fortitude, there
were certain qualities in him which at times affected, and in some
cases seemed well nigh to overbalance all the rest. Uncommonly
conscientious for a seaman, and endued with a deep natural reverence,
the wild watery loneliness of his life did therefore strongly incline
him to superstition; but to that sort of superstition, which in some
organizations seems rather to spring, somehow, from intelligence than
from ignorance. Outward portents and inward presentiments were his. And
if at times these things bent the welded iron of his soul, much more
did his far-away domestic memories of his young Cape wife and child,
tend to bend him still more from the original ruggedness of his nature,
and open him still further to those latent influences which, in some
honest-hearted men, restrain the gush of dare-devil daring, so often
evinced by others in the more perilous vicissitudes of the fishery. “I
will have no man in my boat,” said Starbuck, “who is not afraid of a
whale.” By this, he seemed to mean, not only that the most reliable and
useful courage was that which arises from the fair estimation of the
encountered peril, but that an utterly fearless man is a far more
dangerous comrade than a coward.

“Aye, aye,” said Stubb, the second mate, “Starbuck, there, is as
careful a man as you’ll find anywhere in this fishery.” But we shall
ere long see what that word “careful” precisely means when used by a
man like Stubb, or almost any other whale hunter.

Starbuck was no crusader after perils; in him courage was not a
sentiment; but a thing simply useful to him, and always at hand upon
all mortally practical occasions. Besides, he thought, perhaps, that in
this business of whaling, courage was one of the great staple outfits
of the ship, like her beef and her bread, and not to be foolishly
wasted. Wherefore he had no fancy for lowering for whales after
sun-down; nor for persisting in fighting a fish that too much persisted
in fighting him. For, thought Starbuck, I am here in this critical
ocean to kill whales for my living, and not to be killed by them for
theirs; and that hundreds of men had been so killed Starbuck well knew.
What doom was his own father’s? Where, in the bottomless deeps, could
he find the torn limbs of his brother?

With memories like these in him, and, moreover, given to a certain
superstitiousness, as has been said; the courage of this Starbuck which
could, nevertheless, still flourish, must indeed have been extreme. But
it was not in reasonable nature that a man so organized, and with such
terrible experiences and remembrances as he had; it was not in nature
that these things should fail in latently engendering an element in
him, which, under suitable circumstances, would break out from its
confinement, and burn all his courage up. And brave as he might be, it
was that sort of bravery chiefly, visible in some intrepid men, which,
while generally abiding firm in the conflict with seas, or winds, or
whales, or any of the ordinary irrational horrors of the world, yet
cannot withstand those more terrific, because more spiritual terrors,
which sometimes menace you from the concentrating brow of an enraged
and mighty man.

But were the coming narrative to reveal in any instance, the complete
abasement of poor Starbuck’s fortitude, scarce might I have the heart
to write it; for it is a thing most sorrowful, nay shocking, to expose
the fall of valour in the soul. Men may seem detestable as joint
stock-companies and nations; knaves, fools, and murderers there may be;
men may have mean and meagre faces; but man, in the ideal, is so noble
and so sparkling, such a grand and glowing creature, that over any
ignominious blemish in him all his fellows should run to throw their
costliest robes. That immaculate manliness we feel within ourselves, so
far within us, that it remains intact though all the outer character
seem gone; bleeds with keenest anguish at the undraped spectacle of a
valor-ruined man. Nor can piety itself, at such a shameful sight,
completely stifle her upbraidings against the permitting stars. But
this august dignity I treat of, is not the dignity of kings and robes,
but that abounding dignity which has no robed investiture. Thou shalt
see it shining in the arm that wields a pick or drives a spike; that
democratic dignity which, on all hands, radiates without end from God;
Himself! The great God absolute! The centre and circumference of all
democracy! His omnipresence, our divine equality!

If, then, to meanest mariners, and renegades and castaways, I shall
hereafter ascribe high qualities, though dark; weave round them tragic
graces; if even the most mournful, perchance the most abased, among
them all, shall at times lift himself to the exalted mounts; if I shall
touch that workman’s arm with some ethereal light; if I shall spread a
rainbow over his disastrous set of sun; then against all mortal critics
bear me out in it, thou just Spirit of Equality, which hast spread one
royal mantle of humanity over all my kind! Bear me out in it, thou
great democratic God! who didst not refuse to the swart convict,
Bunyan, the pale, poetic pearl; Thou who didst clothe with doubly
hammered leaves of finest gold, the stumped and paupered arm of old
Cervantes; Thou who didst pick up Andrew Jackson from the pebbles; who
didst hurl him upon a war-horse; who didst thunder him higher than a
throne! Thou who, in all Thy mighty, earthly marchings, ever cullest
Thy selectest champions from the kingly commons; bear me out in it, O
God!


CHAPTER 27. Knights and Squires.

Stubb was the second mate. He was a native of Cape Cod; and hence,
according to local usage, was called a Cape-Cod-man. A happy-go-lucky;
neither craven nor valiant; taking perils as they came with an
indifferent air; and while engaged in the most imminent crisis of the
chase, toiling away, calm and collected as a journeyman joiner engaged
for the year. Good-humored, easy, and careless, he presided over his
whale-boat as if the most deadly encounter were but a dinner, and his
crew all invited guests. He was as particular about the comfortable
arrangement of his part of the boat, as an old stage-driver is about
the snugness of his box. When close to the whale, in the very
death-lock of the fight, he handled his unpitying lance coolly and
off-handedly, as a whistling tinker his hammer. He would hum over his
old rigadig tunes while flank and flank with the most exasperated
monster. Long usage had, for this Stubb, converted the jaws of death
into an easy chair. What he thought of death itself, there is no
telling. Whether he ever thought of it at all, might be a question;
but, if he ever did chance to cast his mind that way after a
comfortable dinner, no doubt, like a good sailor, he took it to be a
sort of call of the watch to tumble aloft, and bestir themselves there,
about something which he would find out when he obeyed the order, and
not sooner.

What, perhaps, with other things, made Stubb such an easy-going,
unfearing man, so cheerily trudging off with the burden of life in a
world full of grave pedlars, all bowed to the ground with their packs;
what helped to bring about that almost impious good-humor of his; that
thing must have been his pipe. For, like his nose, his short, black
little pipe was one of the regular features of his face. You would
almost as soon have expected him to turn out of his bunk without his
nose as without his pipe. He kept a whole row of pipes there ready
loaded, stuck in a rack, within easy reach of his hand; and, whenever
he turned in, he smoked them all out in succession, lighting one from
the other to the end of the chapter; then loading them again to be in
readiness anew. For, when Stubb dressed, instead of first putting his
legs into his trowsers, he put his pipe into his mouth.

I say this continual smoking must have been one cause, at least, of his
peculiar disposition; for every one knows that this earthly air,
whether ashore or afloat, is terribly infected with the nameless
miseries of the numberless mortals who have died exhaling it; and as in
time of the cholera, some people go about with a camphorated
handkerchief to their mouths; so, likewise, against all mortal
tribulations, Stubb’s tobacco smoke might have operated as a sort of
disinfecting agent.

The third mate was Flask, a native of Tisbury, in Martha’s Vineyard. A
short, stout, ruddy young fellow, very pugnacious concerning whales,
who somehow seemed to think that the great leviathans had personally
and hereditarily affronted him; and therefore it was a sort of point of
honor with him, to destroy them whenever encountered. So utterly lost
was he to all sense of reverence for the many marvels of their majestic
bulk and mystic ways; and so dead to anything like an apprehension of
any possible danger from encountering them; that in his poor opinion,
the wondrous whale was but a species of magnified mouse, or at least
water-rat, requiring only a little circumvention and some small
application of time and trouble in order to kill and boil. This
ignorant, unconscious fearlessness of his made him a little waggish in
the matter of whales; he followed these fish for the fun of it; and a
three years’ voyage round Cape Horn was only a jolly joke that lasted
that length of time. As a carpenter’s nails are divided into wrought
nails and cut nails; so mankind may be similarly divided. Little Flask
was one of the wrought ones; made to clinch tight and last long. They
called him King-Post on board of the Pequod; because, in form, he could
be well likened to the short, square timber known by that name in
Arctic whalers; and which by the means of many radiating side timbers
inserted into it, serves to brace the ship against the icy concussions
of those battering seas.

Now these three mates—Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, were momentous men.
They it was who by universal prescription commanded three of the
Pequod’s boats as headsmen. In that grand order of battle in which
Captain Ahab would probably marshal his forces to descend on the
whales, these three headsmen were as captains of companies. Or, being
armed with their long keen whaling spears, they were as a picked trio
of lancers; even as the harpooneers were flingers of javelins.

And since in this famous fishery, each mate or headsman, like a Gothic
Knight of old, is always accompanied by his boat-steerer or harpooneer,
who in certain conjunctures provides him with a fresh lance, when the
former one has been badly twisted, or elbowed in the assault; and
moreover, as there generally subsists between the two, a close intimacy
and friendliness; it is therefore but meet, that in this place we set
down who the Pequod’s harpooneers were, and to what headsman each of
them belonged.

First of all was Queequeg, whom Starbuck, the chief mate, had selected
for his squire. But Queequeg is already known.

Next was Tashtego, an unmixed Indian from Gay Head, the most westerly
promontory of Martha’s Vineyard, where there still exists the last
remnant of a village of red men, which has long supplied the
neighboring island of Nantucket with many of her most daring
harpooneers. In the fishery, they usually go by the generic name of
Gay-Headers. Tashtego’s long, lean, sable hair, his high cheek bones,
and black rounding eyes—for an Indian, Oriental in their largeness, but
Antarctic in their glittering expression—all this sufficiently
proclaimed him an inheritor of the unvitiated blood of those proud
warrior hunters, who, in quest of the great New England moose, had
scoured, bow in hand, the aboriginal forests of the main. But no longer
snuffing in the trail of the wild beasts of the woodland, Tashtego now
hunted in the wake of the great whales of the sea; the unerring harpoon
of the son fitly replacing the infallible arrow of the sires. To look
at the tawny brawn of his lithe snaky limbs, you would almost have
credited the superstitions of some of the earlier Puritans, and
half-believed this wild Indian to be a son of the Prince of the Powers
of the Air. Tashtego was Stubb the second mate’s squire.

Third among the harpooneers was Daggoo, a gigantic, coal-black
negro-savage, with a lion-like tread—an Ahasuerus to behold. Suspended
from his ears were two golden hoops, so large that the sailors called
them ring-bolts, and would talk of securing the top-sail halyards to
them. In his youth Daggoo had voluntarily shipped on board of a whaler,
lying in a lonely bay on his native coast. And never having been
anywhere in the world but in Africa, Nantucket, and the pagan harbors
most frequented by whalemen; and having now led for many years the bold
life of the fishery in the ships of owners uncommonly heedful of what
manner of men they shipped; Daggoo retained all his barbaric virtues,
and erect as a giraffe, moved about the decks in all the pomp of six
feet five in his socks. There was a corporeal humility in looking up at
him; and a white man standing before him seemed a white flag come to
beg truce of a fortress. Curious to tell, this imperial negro,
Ahasuerus Daggoo, was the Squire of little Flask, who looked like a
chess-man beside him. As for the residue of the Pequod’s company, be it
said, that at the present day not one in two of the many thousand men
before the mast employed in the American whale fishery, are Americans
born, though pretty nearly all the officers are. Herein it is the same
with the American whale fishery as with the American army and military
and merchant navies, and the engineering forces employed in the
construction of the American Canals and Railroads. The same, I say,
because in all these cases the native American liberally provides the
brains, the rest of the world as generously supplying the muscles. No
small number of these whaling seamen belong to the Azores, where the
outward bound Nantucket whalers frequently touch to augment their crews
from the hardy peasants of those rocky shores. In like manner, the
Greenland whalers sailing out of Hull or London, put in at the Shetland
Islands, to receive the full complement of their crew. Upon the passage
homewards, they drop them there again. How it is, there is no telling,
but Islanders seem to make the best whalemen. They were nearly all
Islanders in the Pequod, _Isolatoes_ too, I call such, not
acknowledging the common continent of men, but each _Isolato_ living on
a separate continent of his own. Yet now, federated along one keel,
what a set these Isolatoes were! An Anacharsis Clootz deputation from
all the isles of the sea, and all the ends of the earth, accompanying
Old Ahab in the Pequod to lay the world’s grievances before that bar
from which not very many of them ever come back. Black Little Pip—he
never did—oh, no! he went before. Poor Alabama boy! On the grim
Pequod’s forecastle, ye shall ere long see him, beating his tambourine;
prelusive of the eternal time, when sent for, to the great quarter-deck
on high, he was bid strike in with angels, and beat his tambourine in
glory; called a coward here, hailed a hero there!


CHAPTER 28. Ahab.

For several days after leaving Nantucket, nothing above hatches was
seen of Captain Ahab. The mates regularly relieved each other at the
watches, and for aught that could be seen to the contrary, they seemed
to be the only commanders of the ship; only they sometimes issued from
the cabin with orders so sudden and peremptory, that after all it was
plain they but commanded vicariously. Yes, their supreme lord and
dictator was there, though hitherto unseen by any eyes not permitted to
penetrate into the now sacred retreat of the cabin.

Every time I ascended to the deck from my watches below, I instantly
gazed aft to mark if any strange face were visible; for my first vague
disquietude touching the unknown captain, now in the seclusion of the
sea, became almost a perturbation. This was strangely heightened at
times by the ragged Elijah’s diabolical incoherences uninvitedly
recurring to me, with a subtle energy I could not have before conceived
of. But poorly could I withstand them, much as in other moods I was
almost ready to smile at the solemn whimsicalities of that outlandish
prophet of the wharves. But whatever it was of apprehensiveness or
uneasiness—to call it so—which I felt, yet whenever I came to look
about me in the ship, it seemed against all warrantry to cherish such
emotions. For though the harpooneers, with the great body of the crew,
were a far more barbaric, heathenish, and motley set than any of the
tame merchant-ship companies which my previous experiences had made me
acquainted with, still I ascribed this—and rightly ascribed it—to the
fierce uniqueness of the very nature of that wild Scandinavian vocation
in which I had so abandonedly embarked. But it was especially the
aspect of the three chief officers of the ship, the mates, which was
most forcibly calculated to allay these colourless misgivings, and
induce confidence and cheerfulness in every presentment of the voyage.
Three better, more likely sea-officers and men, each in his own
different way, could not readily be found, and they were every one of
them Americans; a Nantucketer, a Vineyarder, a Cape man. Now, it being
Christmas when the ship shot from out her harbor, for a space we had
biting Polar weather, though all the time running away from it to the
southward; and by every degree and minute of latitude which we sailed,
gradually leaving that merciless winter, and all its intolerable
weather behind us. It was one of those less lowering, but still grey
and gloomy enough mornings of the transition, when with a fair wind the
ship was rushing through the water with a vindictive sort of leaping
and melancholy rapidity, that as I mounted to the deck at the call of
the forenoon watch, so soon as I levelled my glance towards the
taffrail, foreboding shivers ran over me. Reality outran apprehension;
Captain Ahab stood upon his quarter-deck.

There seemed no sign of common bodily illness about him, nor of the
recovery from any. He looked like a man cut away from the stake, when
the fire has overrunningly wasted all the limbs without consuming them,
or taking away one particle from their compacted aged robustness. His
whole high, broad form, seemed made of solid bronze, and shaped in an
unalterable mould, like Cellini’s cast Perseus. Threading its way out
from among his grey hairs, and continuing right down one side of his
tawny scorched face and neck, till it disappeared in his clothing, you
saw a slender rod-like mark, lividly whitish. It resembled that
perpendicular seam sometimes made in the straight, lofty trunk of a
great tree, when the upper lightning tearingly darts down it, and
without wrenching a single twig, peels and grooves out the bark from
top to bottom, ere running off into the soil, leaving the tree still
greenly alive, but branded. Whether that mark was born with him, or
whether it was the scar left by some desperate wound, no one could
certainly say. By some tacit consent, throughout the voyage little or
no allusion was made to it, especially by the mates. But once
Tashtego’s senior, an old Gay-Head Indian among the crew,
superstitiously asserted that not till he was full forty years old did
Ahab become that way branded, and then it came upon him, not in the
fury of any mortal fray, but in an elemental strife at sea. Yet, this
wild hint seemed inferentially negatived, by what a grey Manxman
insinuated, an old sepulchral man, who, having never before sailed out
of Nantucket, had never ere this laid eye upon wild Ahab. Nevertheless,
the old sea-traditions, the immemorial credulities, popularly invested
this old Manxman with preternatural powers of discernment. So that no
white sailor seriously contradicted him when he said that if ever
Captain Ahab should be tranquilly laid out—which might hardly come to
pass, so he muttered—then, whoever should do that last office for the
dead, would find a birth-mark on him from crown to sole.

So powerfully did the whole grim aspect of Ahab affect me, and the
livid brand which streaked it, that for the first few moments I hardly
noted that not a little of this overbearing grimness was owing to the
barbaric white leg upon which he partly stood. It had previously come
to me that this ivory leg had at sea been fashioned from the polished
bone of the sperm whale’s jaw. “Aye, he was dismasted off Japan,” said
the old Gay-Head Indian once; “but like his dismasted craft, he shipped
another mast without coming home for it. He has a quiver of ’em.”

I was struck with the singular posture he maintained. Upon each side of
the Pequod’s quarter deck, and pretty close to the mizzen shrouds,
there was an auger hole, bored about half an inch or so, into the
plank. His bone leg steadied in that hole; one arm elevated, and
holding by a shroud; Captain Ahab stood erect, looking straight out
beyond the ship’s ever-pitching prow. There was an infinity of firmest
fortitude, a determinate, unsurrenderable wilfulness, in the fixed and
fearless, forward dedication of that glance. Not a word he spoke; nor
did his officers say aught to him; though by all their minutest
gestures and expressions, they plainly showed the uneasy, if not
painful, consciousness of being under a troubled master-eye. And not
only that, but moody stricken Ahab stood before them with a crucifixion
in his face; in all the nameless regal overbearing dignity of some
mighty woe.

Ere long, from his first visit in the air, he withdrew into his cabin.
But after that morning, he was every day visible to the crew; either
standing in his pivot-hole, or seated upon an ivory stool he had; or
heavily walking the deck. As the sky grew less gloomy; indeed, began to
grow a little genial, he became still less and less a recluse; as if,
when the ship had sailed from home, nothing but the dead wintry
bleakness of the sea had then kept him so secluded. And, by and by, it
came to pass, that he was almost continually in the air; but, as yet,
for all that he said, or perceptibly did, on the at last sunny deck, he
seemed as unnecessary there as another mast. But the Pequod was only
making a passage now; not regularly cruising; nearly all whaling
preparatives needing supervision the mates were fully competent to, so
that there was little or nothing, out of himself, to employ or excite
Ahab, now; and thus chase away, for that one interval, the clouds that
layer upon layer were piled upon his brow, as ever all clouds choose
the loftiest peaks to pile themselves upon.

Nevertheless, ere long, the warm, warbling persuasiveness of the
pleasant, holiday weather we came to, seemed gradually to charm him
from his mood. For, as when the red-cheeked, dancing girls, April and
May, trip home to the wintry, misanthropic woods; even the barest,
ruggedest, most thunder-cloven old oak will at least send forth some
few green sprouts, to welcome such glad-hearted visitants; so Ahab did,
in the end, a little respond to the playful allurings of that girlish
air. More than once did he put forth the faint blossom of a look,
which, in any other man, would have soon flowered out in a smile.


CHAPTER 29. Enter Ahab; to Him, Stubb.

Some days elapsed, and ice and icebergs all astern, the Pequod now went
rolling through the bright Quito spring, which, at sea, almost
perpetually reigns on the threshold of the eternal August of the
Tropic. The warmly cool, clear, ringing, perfumed, overflowing,
redundant days, were as crystal goblets of Persian sherbet, heaped
up—flaked up, with rose-water snow. The starred and stately nights
seemed haughty dames in jewelled velvets, nursing at home in lonely
pride, the memory of their absent conquering Earls, the golden helmeted
suns! For sleeping man, ’twas hard to choose between such winsome days
and such seducing nights. But all the witcheries of that unwaning
weather did not merely lend new spells and potencies to the outward
world. Inward they turned upon the soul, especially when the still mild
hours of eve came on; then, memory shot her crystals as the clear ice
most forms of noiseless twilights. And all these subtle agencies, more
and more they wrought on Ahab’s texture.

Old age is always wakeful; as if, the longer linked with life, the less
man has to do with aught that looks like death. Among sea-commanders,
the old greybeards will oftenest leave their berths to visit the
night-cloaked deck. It was so with Ahab; only that now, of late, he
seemed so much to live in the open air, that truly speaking, his visits
were more to the cabin, than from the cabin to the planks. “It feels
like going down into one’s tomb,”—he would mutter to himself—“for an
old captain like me to be descending this narrow scuttle, to go to my
grave-dug berth.”

So, almost every twenty-four hours, when the watches of the night were
set, and the band on deck sentinelled the slumbers of the band below;
and when if a rope was to be hauled upon the forecastle, the sailors
flung it not rudely down, as by day, but with some cautiousness dropt
it to its place for fear of disturbing their slumbering shipmates; when
this sort of steady quietude would begin to prevail, habitually, the
silent steersman would watch the cabin-scuttle; and ere long the old
man would emerge, gripping at the iron banister, to help his crippled
way. Some considering touch of humanity was in him; for at times like
these, he usually abstained from patrolling the quarter-deck; because
to his wearied mates, seeking repose within six inches of his ivory
heel, such would have been the reverberating crack and din of that bony
step, that their dreams would have been on the crunching teeth of
sharks. But once, the mood was on him too deep for common regardings;
and as with heavy, lumber-like pace he was measuring the ship from
taffrail to mainmast, Stubb, the old second mate, came up from below,
with a certain unassured, deprecating humorousness, hinted that if
Captain Ahab was pleased to walk the planks, then, no one could say
nay; but there might be some way of muffling the noise; hinting
something indistinctly and hesitatingly about a globe of tow, and the
insertion into it, of the ivory heel. Ah! Stubb, thou didst not know
Ahab then.

“Am I a cannon-ball, Stubb,” said Ahab, “that thou wouldst wad me that
fashion? But go thy ways; I had forgot. Below to thy nightly grave;
where such as ye sleep between shrouds, to use ye to the filling one at
last.—Down, dog, and kennel!”

Starting at the unforseen concluding exclamation of the so suddenly
scornful old man, Stubb was speechless a moment; then said excitedly,
“I am not used to be spoken to that way, sir; I do but less than half
like it, sir.”

“Avast! gritted Ahab between his set teeth, and violently moving away,
as if to avoid some passionate temptation.

“No, sir; not yet,” said Stubb, emboldened, “I will not tamely be
called a dog, sir.”

“Then be called ten times a donkey, and a mule, and an ass, and begone,
or I’ll clear the world of thee!”

As he said this, Ahab advanced upon him with such overbearing terrors
in his aspect, that Stubb involuntarily retreated.

“I was never served so before without giving a hard blow for it,”
muttered Stubb, as he found himself descending the cabin-scuttle. “It’s
very queer. Stop, Stubb; somehow, now, I don’t well know whether to go
back and strike him, or—what’s that?—down here on my knees and pray for
him? Yes, that was the thought coming up in me; but it would be the
first time I ever _did_ pray. It’s queer; very queer; and he’s queer
too; aye, take him fore and aft, he’s about the queerest old man Stubb
ever sailed with. How he flashed at me!—his eyes like powder-pans! is
he mad? Anyway there’s something on his mind, as sure as there must be
something on a deck when it cracks. He aint in his bed now, either,
more than three hours out of the twenty-four; and he don’t sleep then.
Didn’t that Dough-Boy, the steward, tell me that of a morning he always
finds the old man’s hammock clothes all rumpled and tumbled, and the
sheets down at the foot, and the coverlid almost tied into knots, and
the pillow a sort of frightful hot, as though a baked brick had been on
it? A hot old man! I guess he’s got what some folks ashore call a
conscience; it’s a kind of Tic-Dolly-row they say—worse nor a
toothache. Well, well; I don’t know what it is, but the Lord keep me
from catching it. He’s full of riddles; I wonder what he goes into the
after hold for, every night, as Dough-Boy tells me he suspects; what’s
that for, I should like to know? Who’s made appointments with him in
the hold? Ain’t that queer, now? But there’s no telling, it’s the old
game—Here goes for a snooze. Damn me, it’s worth a fellow’s while to be
born into the world, if only to fall right asleep. And now that I think
of it, that’s about the first thing babies do, and that’s a sort of
queer, too. Damn me, but all things are queer, come to think of ’em.
But that’s against my principles. Think not, is my eleventh
commandment; and sleep when you can, is my twelfth—So here goes again.
But how’s that? didn’t he call me a dog? blazes! he called me ten times
a donkey, and piled a lot of jackasses on top of _that!_ He might as
well have kicked me, and done with it. Maybe he _did_ kick me, and I
didn’t observe it, I was so taken all aback with his brow, somehow. It
flashed like a bleached bone. What the devil’s the matter with me? I
don’t stand right on my legs. Coming afoul of that old man has a sort
of turned me wrong side out. By the Lord, I must have been dreaming,
though—How? how? how?—but the only way’s to stash it; so here goes to
hammock again; and in the morning, I’ll see how this plaguey juggling
thinks over by daylight.”


CHAPTER 30. The Pipe.

When Stubb had departed, Ahab stood for a while leaning over the
bulwarks; and then, as had been usual with him of late, calling a
sailor of the watch, he sent him below for his ivory stool, and also
his pipe. Lighting the pipe at the binnacle lamp and planting the stool
on the weather side of the deck, he sat and smoked.

In old Norse times, the thrones of the sea-loving Danish kings were
fabricated, saith tradition, of the tusks of the narwhale. How could
one look at Ahab then, seated on that tripod of bones, without
bethinking him of the royalty it symbolized? For a Khan of the plank,
and a king of the sea, and a great lord of Leviathans was Ahab.

Some moments passed, during which the thick vapor came from his mouth
in quick and constant puffs, which blew back again into his face. “How
now,” he soliloquized at last, withdrawing the tube, “this smoking no
longer soothes. Oh, my pipe! hard must it go with me if thy charm be
gone! Here have I been unconsciously toiling, not pleasuring—aye, and
ignorantly smoking to windward all the while; to windward, and with
such nervous whiffs, as if, like the dying whale, my final jets were
the strongest and fullest of trouble. What business have I with this
pipe? This thing that is meant for sereneness, to send up mild white
vapors among mild white hairs, not among torn iron-grey locks like
mine. I’ll smoke no more—”

He tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea. The fire hissed in the
waves; the same instant the ship shot by the bubble the sinking pipe
made. With slouched hat, Ahab lurchingly paced the planks.


CHAPTER 31. Queen Mab.

Next morning Stubb accosted Flask.

“Such a queer dream, King-Post, I never had. You know the old man’s
ivory leg, well I dreamed he kicked me with it; and when I tried to
kick back, upon my soul, my little man, I kicked my leg right off! And
then, presto! Ahab seemed a pyramid, and I, like a blazing fool, kept
kicking at it. But what was still more curious, Flask—you know how
curious all dreams are—through all this rage that I was in, I somehow
seemed to be thinking to myself, that after all, it was not much of an
insult, that kick from Ahab. ‘Why,’ thinks I, ‘what’s the row? It’s not
a real leg, only a false leg.’ And there’s a mighty difference between
a living thump and a dead thump. That’s what makes a blow from the
hand, Flask, fifty times more savage to bear than a blow from a cane.
The living member—that makes the living insult, my little man. And
thinks I to myself all the while, mind, while I was stubbing my silly
toes against that cursed pyramid—so confoundedly contradictory was it
all, all the while, I say, I was thinking to myself, ‘what’s his leg
now, but a cane—a whalebone cane. Yes,’ thinks I, ‘it was only a
playful cudgelling—in fact, only a whaleboning that he gave me—not a
base kick. Besides,’ thinks I, ‘look at it once; why, the end of it—the
foot part—what a small sort of end it is; whereas, if a broad footed
farmer kicked me, _there’s_ a devilish broad insult. But this insult is
whittled down to a point only.’ But now comes the greatest joke of the
dream, Flask. While I was battering away at the pyramid, a sort of
badger-haired old merman, with a hump on his back, takes me by the
shoulders, and slews me round. ‘What are you ’bout?’ says he. Slid!
man, but I was frightened. Such a phiz! But, somehow, next moment I was
over the fright. ‘What am I about?’ says I at last. ‘And what business
is that of yours, I should like to know, Mr. Humpback? Do _you_ want a
kick?’ By the lord, Flask, I had no sooner said that, than he turned
round his stern to me, bent over, and dragging up a lot of seaweed he
had for a clout—what do you think, I saw?—why thunder alive, man, his
stern was stuck full of marlinspikes, with the points out. Says I, on
second thoughts, ‘I guess I won’t kick you, old fellow.’ ‘Wise Stubb,’
said he, ‘wise Stubb;’ and kept muttering it all the time, a sort of
eating of his own gums like a chimney hag. Seeing he wasn’t going to
stop saying over his ‘wise Stubb, wise Stubb,’ I thought I might as
well fall to kicking the pyramid again. But I had only just lifted my
foot for it, when he roared out, ‘Stop that kicking!’ ‘Halloa,’ says I,
‘what’s the matter now, old fellow?’ ‘Look ye here,’ says he; ‘let’s
argue the insult. Captain Ahab kicked ye, didn’t he?’ ‘Yes, he did,’
says I—‘right _here_ it was.’ ‘Very good,’ says he—‘he used his ivory
leg, didn’t he?’ ‘Yes, he did,’ says I. ‘Well then,’ says he, ‘wise
Stubb, what have you to complain of? Didn’t he kick with right good
will? it wasn’t a common pitch pine leg he kicked with, was it? No, you
were kicked by a great man, and with a beautiful ivory leg, Stubb. It’s
an honor; I consider it an honor. Listen, wise Stubb. In old England
the greatest lords think it great glory to be slapped by a queen, and
made garter-knights of; but, be _your_ boast, Stubb, that ye were
kicked by old Ahab, and made a wise man of. Remember what I say; _be_
kicked by him; account his kicks honors; and on no account kick back;
for you can’t help yourself, wise Stubb. Don’t you see that pyramid?’
With that, he all of a sudden seemed somehow, in some queer fashion, to
swim off into the air. I snored; rolled over; and there I was in my
hammock! Now, what do you think of that dream, Flask?”

“I don’t know; it seems a sort of foolish to me, tho.’”

“May be; may be. But it’s made a wise man of me, Flask. D’ye see Ahab
standing there, sideways looking over the stern? Well, the best thing
you can do, Flask, is to let the old man alone; never speak to him,
whatever he says. Halloa! What’s that he shouts? Hark!”

“Mast-head, there! Look sharp, all of ye! There are whales hereabouts!

“If ye see a white one, split your lungs for him!

“What do you think of that now, Flask? ain’t there a small drop of
something queer about that, eh? A white whale—did ye mark that, man?
Look ye—there’s something special in the wind. Stand by for it, Flask.
Ahab has that that’s bloody on his mind. But, mum; he comes this way.”


CHAPTER 32. Cetology.

Already we are boldly launched upon the deep; but soon we shall be lost
in its unshored, harbourless immensities. Ere that come to pass; ere
the Pequod’s weedy hull rolls side by side with the barnacled hulls of
the leviathan; at the outset it is but well to attend to a matter
almost indispensable to a thorough appreciative understanding of the
more special leviathanic revelations and allusions of all sorts which
are to follow.

It is some systematized exhibition of the whale in his broad genera,
that I would now fain put before you. Yet is it no easy task. The
classification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less is here
essayed. Listen to what the best and latest authorities have laid down.

“No branch of Zoology is so much involved as that which is entitled
Cetology,” says Captain Scoresby, A.D. 1820.

“It is not my intention, were it in my power, to enter into the inquiry
as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groups and families.
* * * Utter confusion exists among the historians of this animal”
(sperm whale), says Surgeon Beale, A.D. 1839.

“Unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable waters.”
“Impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of the cetacea.” “A field
strewn with thorns.” “All these incomplete indications but serve to
torture us naturalists.”

Thus speak of the whale, the great Cuvier, and John Hunter, and Lesson,
those lights of zoology and anatomy. Nevertheless, though of real
knowledge there be little, yet of books there are a plenty; and so in
some small degree, with cetology, or the science of whales. Many are
the men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and seamen, who have at
large or in little, written of the whale. Run over a few:—The Authors
of the Bible; Aristotle; Pliny; Aldrovandi; Sir Thomas Browne; Gesner;
Ray; Linnæus; Rondeletius; Willoughby; Green; Artedi; Sibbald; Brisson;
Marten; Lacépède; Bonneterre; Desmarest; Baron Cuvier; Frederick
Cuvier; John Hunter; Owen; Scoresby; Beale; Bennett; J. Ross Browne;
the Author of Miriam Coffin; Olmstead; and the Rev. T. Cheever. But to
what ultimate generalizing purpose all these have written, the above
cited extracts will show.

Of the names in this list of whale authors, only those following Owen
ever saw living whales; and but one of them was a real professional
harpooneer and whaleman. I mean Captain Scoresby. On the separate
subject of the Greenland or right-whale, he is the best existing
authority. But Scoresby knew nothing and says nothing of the great
sperm whale, compared with which the Greenland whale is almost unworthy
mentioning. And here be it said, that the Greenland whale is an usurper
upon the throne of the seas. He is not even by any means the largest of
the whales. Yet, owing to the long priority of his claims, and the
profound ignorance which, till some seventy years back, invested the
then fabulous or utterly unknown sperm-whale, and which ignorance to
this present day still reigns in all but some few scientific retreats
and whale-ports; this usurpation has been every way complete. Reference
to nearly all the leviathanic allusions in the great poets of past
days, will satisfy you that the Greenland whale, without one rival, was
to them the monarch of the seas. But the time has at last come for a
new proclamation. This is Charing Cross; hear ye! good people all,—the
Greenland whale is deposed,—the great sperm whale now reigneth!

There are only two books in being which at all pretend to put the
living sperm whale before you, and at the same time, in the remotest
degree succeed in the attempt. Those books are Beale’s and Bennett’s;
both in their time surgeons to English South-Sea whale-ships, and both
exact and reliable men. The original matter touching the sperm whale to
be found in their volumes is necessarily small; but so far as it goes,
it is of excellent quality, though mostly confined to scientific
description. As yet, however, the sperm whale, scientific or poetic,
lives not complete in any literature. Far above all other hunted
whales, his is an unwritten life.

Now the various species of whales need some sort of popular
comprehensive classification, if only an easy outline one for the
present, hereafter to be filled in all its departments by subsequent
laborers. As no better man advances to take this matter in hand, I
hereupon offer my own poor endeavors. I promise nothing complete;
because any human thing supposed to be complete, must for that very
reason infallibly be faulty. I shall not pretend to a minute anatomical
description of the various species, or—in this place at least—to much
of any description. My object here is simply to project the draught of
a systematization of cetology. I am the architect, not the builder.

But it is a ponderous task; no ordinary letter-sorter in the
Post-Office is equal to it. To grope down into the bottom of the sea
after them; to have one’s hands among the unspeakable foundations,
ribs, and very pelvis of the world; this is a fearful thing. What am I
that I should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan! The awful
tauntings in Job might well appal me. Will he (the leviathan) make a
covenant with thee? Behold the hope of him is vain! But I have swam
through libraries and sailed through oceans; I have had to do with
whales with these visible hands; I am in earnest; and I will try. There
are some preliminaries to settle.

First: The uncertain, unsettled condition of this science of Cetology
is in the very vestibule attested by the fact, that in some quarters it
still remains a moot point whether a whale be a fish. In his System of
Nature, A.D. 1776, Linnæus declares, “I hereby separate the whales from
the fish.” But of my own knowledge, I know that down to the year 1850,
sharks and shad, alewives and herring, against Linnæus’s express edict,
were still found dividing the possession of the same seas with the
Leviathan.

The grounds upon which Linnæus would fain have banished the whales from
the waters, he states as follows: “On account of their warm bilocular
heart, their lungs, their movable eyelids, their hollow ears, penem
intrantem feminam mammis lactantem,” and finally, “ex lege naturæ jure
meritoque.” I submitted all this to my friends Simeon Macey and Charley
Coffin, of Nantucket, both messmates of mine in a certain voyage, and
they united in the opinion that the reasons set forth were altogether
insufficient. Charley profanely hinted they were humbug.

Be it known that, waiving all argument, I take the good old fashioned
ground that the whale is a fish, and call upon holy Jonah to back me.
This fundamental thing settled, the next point is, in what internal
respect does the whale differ from other fish. Above, Linnæus has given
you those items. But in brief, they are these: lungs and warm blood;
whereas, all other fish are lungless and cold blooded.

Next: how shall we define the whale, by his obvious externals, so as
conspicuously to label him for all time to come? To be short, then, a
whale is _a spouting fish with a horizontal tail_. There you have him.
However contracted, that definition is the result of expanded
meditation. A walrus spouts much like a whale, but the walrus is not a
fish, because he is amphibious. But the last term of the definition is
still more cogent, as coupled with the first. Almost any one must have
noticed that all the fish familiar to landsmen have not a flat, but a
vertical, or up-and-down tail. Whereas, among spouting fish the tail,
though it may be similarly shaped, invariably assumes a horizontal
position.

By the above definition of what a whale is, I do by no means exclude
from the leviathanic brotherhood any sea creature hitherto identified
with the whale by the best informed Nantucketers; nor, on the other
hand, link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively regarded as
alien.* Hence, all the smaller, spouting, and horizontal tailed fish
must be included in this ground-plan of Cetology. Now, then, come the
grand divisions of the entire whale host.

*I am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled Lamatins and
Dugongs (Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of Nantucket) are
included by many naturalists among the whales. But as these pig-fish
are a noisy, contemptible set, mostly lurking in the mouths of rivers,
and feeding on wet hay, and especially as they do not spout, I deny
their credentials as whales; and have presented them with their
passports to quit the Kingdom of Cetology.

First: According to magnitude I divide the whales into three primary
BOOKS (subdivisible into CHAPTERS), and these shall comprehend them
all, both small and large.

I. THE FOLIO WHALE; II. the OCTAVO WHALE; III. the DUODECIMO WHALE.

As the type of the FOLIO I present the _Sperm Whale_; of the OCTAVO,
the _Grampus_; of the DUODECIMO, the _Porpoise_.

FOLIOS. Among these I here include the following chapters:—I. The
_Sperm Whale_; II. the _Right Whale_; III. the _Fin-Back Whale_; IV.
the _Hump-backed Whale_; V. the _Razor Back Whale_; VI. the _Sulphur
Bottom Whale_.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER I. (_Sperm Whale_).—This whale, among the
English of old vaguely known as the Trumpa whale, and the Physeter
whale, and the Anvil Headed whale, is the present Cachalot of the
French, and the Pottsfich of the Germans, and the Macrocephalus of the
Long Words. He is, without doubt, the largest inhabitant of the globe;
the most formidable of all whales to encounter; the most majestic in
aspect; and lastly, by far the most valuable in commerce; he being the
only creature from which that valuable substance, spermaceti, is
obtained. All his peculiarities will, in many other places, be enlarged
upon. It is chiefly with his name that I now have to do. Philologically
considered, it is absurd. Some centuries ago, when the Sperm whale was
almost wholly unknown in his own proper individuality, and when his oil
was only accidentally obtained from the stranded fish; in those days
spermaceti, it would seem, was popularly supposed to be derived from a
creature identical with the one then known in England as the Greenland
or Right Whale. It was the idea also, that this same spermaceti was
that quickening humor of the Greenland Whale which the first syllable
of the word literally expresses. In those times, also, spermaceti was
exceedingly scarce, not being used for light, but only as an ointment
and medicament. It was only to be had from the druggists as you
nowadays buy an ounce of rhubarb. When, as I opine, in the course of
time, the true nature of spermaceti became known, its original name was
still retained by the dealers; no doubt to enhance its value by a
notion so strangely significant of its scarcity. And so the appellation
must at last have come to be bestowed upon the whale from which this
spermaceti was really derived.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER II. (_Right Whale_).—In one respect this is
the most venerable of the leviathans, being the one first regularly
hunted by man. It yields the article commonly known as whalebone or
baleen; and the oil specially known as “whale oil,” an inferior article
in commerce. Among the fishermen, he is indiscriminately designated by
all the following titles: The Whale; the Greenland Whale; the Black
Whale; the Great Whale; the True Whale; the Right Whale. There is a
deal of obscurity concerning the identity of the species thus
multitudinously baptised. What then is the whale, which I include in
the second species of my Folios? It is the Great Mysticetus of the
English naturalists; the Greenland Whale of the English whalemen; the
Baleine Ordinaire of the French whalemen; the Growlands Walfish of the
Swedes. It is the whale which for more than two centuries past has been
hunted by the Dutch and English in the Arctic seas; it is the whale
which the American fishermen have long pursued in the Indian ocean, on
the Brazil Banks, on the Nor’ West Coast, and various other parts of
the world, designated by them Right Whale Cruising Grounds.

Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland whale of the
English and the right whale of the Americans. But they precisely agree
in all their grand features; nor has there yet been presented a single
determinate fact upon which to ground a radical distinction. It is by
endless subdivisions based upon the most inconclusive differences, that
some departments of natural history become so repellingly intricate.
The right whale will be elsewhere treated of at some length, with
reference to elucidating the sperm whale.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER III. (_Fin-Back_).—Under this head I reckon
a monster which, by the various names of Fin-Back, Tall-Spout, and
Long-John, has been seen almost in every sea and is commonly the whale
whose distant jet is so often descried by passengers crossing the
Atlantic, in the New York packet-tracks. In the length he attains, and
in his baleen, the Fin-back resembles the right whale, but is of a less
portly girth, and a lighter colour, approaching to olive. His great
lips present a cable-like aspect, formed by the intertwisting, slanting
folds of large wrinkles. His grand distinguishing feature, the fin,
from which he derives his name, is often a conspicuous object. This fin
is some three or four feet long, growing vertically from the hinder
part of the back, of an angular shape, and with a very sharp pointed
end. Even if not the slightest other part of the creature be visible,
this isolated fin will, at times, be seen plainly projecting from the
surface. When the sea is moderately calm, and slightly marked with
spherical ripples, and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows
upon the wrinkled surface, it may well be supposed that the watery
circle surrounding it somewhat resembles a dial, with its style and
wavy hour-lines graved on it. On that Ahaz-dial the shadow often goes
back. The Fin-Back is not gregarious. He seems a whale-hater, as some
men are man-haters. Very shy; always going solitary; unexpectedly
rising to the surface in the remotest and most sullen waters; his
straight and single lofty jet rising like a tall misanthropic spear
upon a barren plain; gifted with such wondrous power and velocity in
swimming, as to defy all present pursuit from man; this leviathan seems
the banished and unconquerable Cain of his race, bearing for his mark
that style upon his back. From having the baleen in his mouth, the
Fin-Back is sometimes included with the right whale, among a theoretic
species denominated _Whalebone whales_, that is, whales with baleen. Of
these so called Whalebone whales, there would seem to be several
varieties, most of which, however, are little known. Broad-nosed whales
and beaked whales; pike-headed whales; bunched whales; under-jawed
whales and rostrated whales, are the fishermen’s names for a few sorts.

In connection with this appellative of “Whalebone whales,” it is of
great importance to mention, that however such a nomenclature may be
convenient in facilitating allusions to some kind of whales, yet it is
in vain to attempt a clear classification of the Leviathan, founded
upon either his baleen, or hump, or fin, or teeth; notwithstanding that
those marked parts or features very obviously seem better adapted to
afford the basis for a regular system of Cetology than any other
detached bodily distinctions, which the whale, in his kinds, presents.
How then? The baleen, hump, back-fin, and teeth; these are things whose
peculiarities are indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of whales,
without any regard to what may be the nature of their structure in
other and more essential particulars. Thus, the sperm whale and the
humpbacked whale, each has a hump; but there the similitude ceases.
Then, this same humpbacked whale and the Greenland whale, each of these
has baleen; but there again the similitude ceases. And it is just the
same with the other parts above mentioned. In various sorts of whales,
they form such irregular combinations; or, in the case of any one of
them detached, such an irregular isolation; as utterly to defy all
general methodization formed upon such a basis. On this rock every one
of the whale-naturalists has split.

But it may possibly be conceived that, in the internal parts of the
whale, in his anatomy—there, at least, we shall be able to hit the
right classification. Nay; what thing, for example, is there in the
Greenland whale’s anatomy more striking than his baleen? Yet we have
seen that by his baleen it is impossible correctly to classify the
Greenland whale. And if you descend into the bowels of the various
leviathans, why there you will not find distinctions a fiftieth part as
available to the systematizer as those external ones already
enumerated. What then remains? nothing but to take hold of the whales
bodily, in their entire liberal volume, and boldly sort them that way.
And this is the Bibliographical system here adopted; and it is the only
one that can possibly succeed, for it alone is practicable. To proceed.

BOOK I. (_Folio_) CHAPTER IV. (_Hump Back_).—This whale is often seen
on the northern American coast. He has been frequently captured there,
and towed into harbor. He has a great pack on him like a peddler; or
you might call him the Elephant and Castle whale. At any rate, the
popular name for him does not sufficiently distinguish him, since the
sperm whale also has a hump though a smaller one. His oil is not very
valuable. He has baleen. He is the most gamesome and light-hearted of
all the whales, making more gay foam and white water generally than any
other of them.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER V. (_Razor Back_).—Of this whale little is
known but his name. I have seen him at a distance off Cape Horn. Of a
retiring nature, he eludes both hunters and philosophers. Though no
coward, he has never yet shown any part of him but his back, which
rises in a long sharp ridge. Let him go. I know little more of him, nor
does anybody else.

BOOK I. (_Folio_), CHAPTER VI. (_Sulphur Bottom_).—Another retiring
gentleman, with a brimstone belly, doubtless got by scraping along the
Tartarian tiles in some of his profounder divings. He is seldom seen;
at least I have never seen him except in the remoter southern seas, and
then always at too great a distance to study his countenance. He is
never chased; he would run away with rope-walks of line. Prodigies are
told of him. Adieu, Sulphur Bottom! I can say nothing more that is true
of ye, nor can the oldest Nantucketer.

Thus ends BOOK I. (_Folio_), and now begins BOOK II. (_Octavo_).

OCTAVOES.*—These embrace the whales of middling magnitude, among which
present may be numbered:—I., the _Grampus_; II., the _Black Fish_;
III., the _Narwhale_; IV., the _Thrasher_; V., the _Killer_.

*Why this book of whales is not denominated the Quarto is very plain.
Because, while the whales of this order, though smaller than those of
the former order, nevertheless retain a proportionate likeness to them
in figure, yet the bookbinder’s Quarto volume in its dimensioned form
does not preserve the shape of the Folio volume, but the Octavo volume
does.

BOOK II. (_Octavo_), CHAPTER I. (_Grampus_).—Though this fish, whose
loud sonorous breathing, or rather blowing, has furnished a proverb to
landsmen, is so well known a denizen of the deep, yet is he not
popularly classed among whales. But possessing all the grand
distinctive features of the leviathan, most naturalists have recognised
him for one. He is of moderate octavo size, varying from fifteen to
twenty-five feet in length, and of corresponding dimensions round the
waist. He swims in herds; he is never regularly hunted, though his oil
is considerable in quantity, and pretty good for light. By some
fishermen his approach is regarded as premonitory of the advance of the
great sperm whale.

BOOK II. (_Octavo_), CHAPTER II. (_Black Fish_).—I give the popular
fishermen’s names for all these fish, for generally they are the best.
Where any name happens to be vague or inexpressive, I shall say so, and
suggest another. I do so now, touching the Black Fish, so-called,
because blackness is the rule among almost all whales. So, call him the
Hyena Whale, if you please. His voracity is well known, and from the
circumstance that the inner angles of his lips are curved upwards, he
carries an everlasting Mephistophelean grin on his face. This whale
averages some sixteen or eighteen feet in length. He is found in almost
all latitudes. He has a peculiar way of showing his dorsal hooked fin
in swimming, which looks something like a Roman nose. When not more
profitably employed, the sperm whale hunters sometimes capture the
Hyena whale, to keep up the supply of cheap oil for domestic
employment—as some frugal housekeepers, in the absence of company, and
quite alone by themselves, burn unsavory tallow instead of odorous wax.
Though their blubber is very thin, some of these whales will yield you
upwards of thirty gallons of oil.

BOOK II. (_Octavo_), CHAPTER III. (_Narwhale_), that is, _Nostril
whale_.—Another instance of a curiously named whale, so named I suppose
from his peculiar horn being originally mistaken for a peaked nose. The
creature is some sixteen feet in length, while its horn averages five
feet, though some exceed ten, and even attain to fifteen feet. Strictly
speaking, this horn is but a lengthened tusk, growing out from the jaw
in a line a little depressed from the horizontal. But it is only found
on the sinister side, which has an ill effect, giving its owner
something analogous to the aspect of a clumsy left-handed man. What
precise purpose this ivory horn or lance answers, it would be hard to
say. It does not seem to be used like the blade of the sword-fish and
bill-fish; though some sailors tell me that the Narwhale employs it for
a rake in turning over the bottom of the sea for food. Charley Coffin
said it was used for an ice-piercer; for the Narwhale, rising to the
surface of the Polar Sea, and finding it sheeted with ice, thrusts his
horn up, and so breaks through. But you cannot prove either of these
surmises to be correct. My own opinion is, that however this one-sided
horn may really be used by the Narwhale—however that may be—it would
certainly be very convenient to him for a folder in reading pamphlets.
The Narwhale I have heard called the Tusked whale, the Horned whale,
and the Unicorn whale. He is certainly a curious example of the
Unicornism to be found in almost every kingdom of animated nature. From
certain cloistered old authors I have gathered that this same
sea-unicorn’s horn was in ancient days regarded as the great antidote
against poison, and as such, preparations of it brought immense prices.
It was also distilled to a volatile salts for fainting ladies, the same
way that the horns of the male deer are manufactured into hartshorn.
Originally it was in itself accounted an object of great curiosity.
Black Letter tells me that Sir Martin Frobisher on his return from that
voyage, when Queen Bess did gallantly wave her jewelled hand to him
from a window of Greenwich Palace, as his bold ship sailed down the
Thames; “when Sir Martin returned from that voyage,” saith Black
Letter, “on bended knees he presented to her highness a prodigious long
horn of the Narwhale, which for a long period after hung in the castle
at Windsor.” An Irish author avers that the Earl of Leicester, on
bended knees, did likewise present to her highness another horn,
pertaining to a land beast of the unicorn nature.

The Narwhale has a very picturesque, leopard-like look, being of a
milk-white ground colour, dotted with round and oblong spots of black.
His oil is very superior, clear and fine; but there is little of it,
and he is seldom hunted. He is mostly found in the circumpolar seas.

BOOK II. (_Octavo_), CHAPTER IV. (_Killer_).—Of this whale little is
precisely known to the Nantucketer, and nothing at all to the professed
naturalist. From what I have seen of him at a distance, I should say
that he was about the bigness of a grampus. He is very savage—a sort of
Feegee fish. He sometimes takes the great Folio whales by the lip, and
hangs there like a leech, till the mighty brute is worried to death.
The Killer is never hunted. I never heard what sort of oil he has.
Exception might be taken to the name bestowed upon this whale, on the
ground of its indistinctness. For we are all killers, on land and on
sea; Bonapartes and Sharks included.

BOOK II. (_Octavo_), CHAPTER V. (_Thrasher_).—This gentleman is famous
for his tail, which he uses for a ferule in thrashing his foes. He
mounts the Folio whale’s back, and as he swims, he works his passage by
flogging him; as some schoolmasters get along in the world by a similar
process. Still less is known of the Thrasher than of the Killer. Both
are outlaws, even in the lawless seas.

 Thus ends BOOK II. (_Octavo_), and begins BOOK III. (_Duodecimo_).

DUODECIMOES.—These include the smaller whales. I. The Huzza Porpoise.
II. The Algerine Porpoise. III. The Mealy-mouthed Porpoise.

To those who have not chanced specially to study the subject, it may
possibly seem strange, that fishes not commonly exceeding four or five
feet should be marshalled among WHALES—a word, which, in the popular
sense, always conveys an idea of hugeness. But the creatures set down
above as Duodecimoes are infallibly whales, by the terms of my
definition of what a whale is—_i.e._ a spouting fish, with a horizontal
tail.

BOOK III. (_Duodecimo_), CHAPTER 1. (_Huzza Porpoise_).—This is the
common porpoise found almost all over the globe. The name is of my own
bestowal; for there are more than one sort of porpoises, and something
must be done to distinguish them. I call him thus, because he always
swims in hilarious shoals, which upon the broad sea keep tossing
themselves to heaven like caps in a Fourth-of-July crowd. Their
appearance is generally hailed with delight by the mariner. Full of
fine spirits, they invariably come from the breezy billows to windward.
They are the lads that always live before the wind. They are accounted
a lucky omen. If you yourself can withstand three cheers at beholding
these vivacious fish, then heaven help ye; the spirit of godly
gamesomeness is not in ye. A well-fed, plump Huzza Porpoise will yield
you one good gallon of good oil. But the fine and delicate fluid
extracted from his jaws is exceedingly valuable. It is in request among
jewellers and watchmakers. Sailors put it on their hones. Porpoise meat
is good eating, you know. It may never have occurred to you that a
porpoise spouts. Indeed, his spout is so small that it is not very
readily discernible. But the next time you have a chance, watch him;
and you will then see the great Sperm whale himself in miniature.

BOOK III. (_Duodecimo_), CHAPTER II. (_Algerine Porpoise_).—A pirate.
Very savage. He is only found, I think, in the Pacific. He is somewhat
larger than the Huzza Porpoise, but much of the same general make.
Provoke him, and he will buckle to a shark. I have lowered for him many
times, but never yet saw him captured.

BOOK III. (_Duodecimo_), CHAPTER III. (_Mealy-mouthed Porpoise_).—The
largest kind of Porpoise; and only found in the Pacific, so far as it
is known. The only English name, by which he has hitherto been
designated, is that of the fishers—Right-Whale Porpoise, from the
circumstance that he is chiefly found in the vicinity of that Folio. In
shape, he differs in some degree from the Huzza Porpoise, being of a
less rotund and jolly girth; indeed, he is of quite a neat and
gentleman-like figure. He has no fins on his back (most other porpoises
have), he has a lovely tail, and sentimental Indian eyes of a hazel
hue. But his mealy-mouth spoils all. Though his entire back down to his
side fins is of a deep sable, yet a boundary line, distinct as the mark
in a ship’s hull, called the “bright waist,” that line streaks him from
stem to stern, with two separate colours, black above and white below.
The white comprises part of his head, and the whole of his mouth, which
makes him look as if he had just escaped from a felonious visit to a
meal-bag. A most mean and mealy aspect! His oil is much like that of
the common porpoise.

  * * * * * *

Beyond the DUODECIMO, this system does not proceed, inasmuch as the
Porpoise is the smallest of the whales. Above, you have all the
Leviathans of note. But there are a rabble of uncertain, fugitive,
half-fabulous whales, which, as an American whaleman, I know by
reputation, but not personally. I shall enumerate them by their
fore-castle appellations; for possibly such a list may be valuable to
future investigators, who may complete what I have here but begun. If
any of the following whales, shall hereafter be caught and marked, then
he can readily be incorporated into this System, according to his
Folio, Octavo, or Duodecimo magnitude:—The Bottle-Nose Whale; the Junk
Whale; the Pudding-Headed Whale; the Cape Whale; the Leading Whale; the
Cannon Whale; the Scragg Whale; the Coppered Whale; the Elephant Whale;
the Iceberg Whale; the Quog Whale; the Blue Whale; etc. From Icelandic,
Dutch, and old English authorities, there might be quoted other lists
of uncertain whales, blessed with all manner of uncouth names. But I
omit them as altogether obsolete; and can hardly help suspecting them
for mere sounds, full of Leviathanism, but signifying nothing.

Finally: It was stated at the outset, that this system would not be
here, and at once, perfected. You cannot but plainly see that I have
kept my word. But I now leave my cetological System standing thus
unfinished, even as the great Cathedral of Cologne was left, with the
crane still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower. For small
erections may be finished by their first architects; grand ones, true
ones, ever leave the copestone to posterity. God keep me from ever
completing anything. This whole book is but a draught—nay, but the
draught of a draught. Oh, Time, Strength, Cash, and Patience!


CHAPTER 33. The Specksnyder.

Concerning the officers of the whale-craft, this seems as good a place
as any to set down a little domestic peculiarity on ship-board, arising
from the existence of the harpooneer class of officers, a class unknown
of course in any other marine than the whale-fleet.

The large importance attached to the harpooneer’s vocation is evinced
by the fact, that originally in the old Dutch Fishery, two centuries
and more ago, the command of a whale ship was not wholly lodged in the
person now called the captain, but was divided between him and an
officer called the Specksnyder. Literally this word means Fat-Cutter;
usage, however, in time made it equivalent to Chief Harpooneer. In
those days, the captain’s authority was restricted to the navigation
and general management of the vessel; while over the whale-hunting
department and all its concerns, the Specksnyder or Chief Harpooneer
reigned supreme. In the British Greenland Fishery, under the corrupted
title of Specksioneer, this old Dutch official is still retained, but
his former dignity is sadly abridged. At present he ranks simply as
senior Harpooneer; and as such, is but one of the captain’s more
inferior subalterns. Nevertheless, as upon the good conduct of the
harpooneers the success of a whaling voyage largely depends, and since
in the American Fishery he is not only an important officer in the
boat, but under certain circumstances (night watches on a whaling
ground) the command of the ship’s deck is also his; therefore the grand
political maxim of the sea demands, that he should nominally live apart
from the men before the mast, and be in some way distinguished as their
professional superior; though always, by them, familiarly regarded as
their social equal.

Now, the grand distinction drawn between officer and man at sea, is
this—the first lives aft, the last forward. Hence, in whale-ships and
merchantmen alike, the mates have their quarters with the captain; and
so, too, in most of the American whalers the harpooneers are lodged in
the after part of the ship. That is to say, they take their meals in
the captain’s cabin, and sleep in a place indirectly communicating with
it.

Though the long period of a Southern whaling voyage (by far the longest
of all voyages now or ever made by man), the peculiar perils of it, and
the community of interest prevailing among a company, all of whom, high
or low, depend for their profits, not upon fixed wages, but upon their
common luck, together with their common vigilance, intrepidity, and
hard work; though all these things do in some cases tend to beget a
less rigorous discipline than in merchantmen generally; yet, never mind
how much like an old Mesopotamian family these whalemen may, in some
primitive instances, live together; for all that, the punctilious
externals, at least, of the quarter-deck are seldom materially relaxed,
and in no instance done away. Indeed, many are the Nantucket ships in
which you will see the skipper parading his quarter-deck with an elated
grandeur not surpassed in any military navy; nay, extorting almost as
much outward homage as if he wore the imperial purple, and not the
shabbiest of pilot-cloth.

And though of all men the moody captain of the Pequod was the least
given to that sort of shallowest assumption; and though the only homage
he ever exacted, was implicit, instantaneous obedience; though he
required no man to remove the shoes from his feet ere stepping upon the
quarter-deck; and though there were times when, owing to peculiar
circumstances connected with events hereafter to be detailed, he
addressed them in unusual terms, whether of condescension or _in
terrorem_, or otherwise; yet even Captain Ahab was by no means
unobservant of the paramount forms and usages of the sea.

Nor, perhaps, will it fail to be eventually perceived, that behind
those forms and usages, as it were, he sometimes masked himself;
incidentally making use of them for other and more private ends than
they were legitimately intended to subserve. That certain sultanism of
his brain, which had otherwise in a good degree remained unmanifested;
through those forms that same sultanism became incarnate in an
irresistible dictatorship. For be a man’s intellectual superiority what
it will, it can never assume the practical, available supremacy over
other men, without the aid of some sort of external arts and
entrenchments, always, in themselves, more or less paltry and base.
This it is, that for ever keeps God’s true princes of the Empire from
the world’s hustings; and leaves the highest honors that this air can
give, to those men who become famous more through their infinite
inferiority to the choice hidden handful of the Divine Inert, than
through their undoubted superiority over the dead level of the mass.
Such large virtue lurks in these small things when extreme political
superstitions invest them, that in some royal instances even to idiot
imbecility they have imparted potency. But when, as in the case of
Nicholas the Czar, the ringed crown of geographical empire encircles an
imperial brain; then, the plebeian herds crouch abased before the
tremendous centralization. Nor, will the tragic dramatist who would
depict mortal indomitableness in its fullest sweep and direct swing,
ever forget a hint, incidentally so important in his art, as the one
now alluded to.

But Ahab, my Captain, still moves before me in all his Nantucket
grimness and shagginess; and in this episode touching Emperors and
Kings, I must not conceal that I have only to do with a poor old
whale-hunter like him; and, therefore, all outward majestical trappings
and housings are denied me. Oh, Ahab! what shall be grand in thee, it
must needs be plucked at from the skies, and dived for in the deep, and
featured in the unbodied air!


CHAPTER 34. The Cabin-Table.

It is noon; and Dough-Boy, the steward, thrusting his pale
loaf-of-bread face from the cabin-scuttle, announces dinner to his lord
and master; who, sitting in the lee quarter-boat, has just been taking
an observation of the sun; and is now mutely reckoning the latitude on
the smooth, medallion-shaped tablet, reserved for that daily purpose on
the upper part of his ivory leg. From his complete inattention to the
tidings, you would think that moody Ahab had not heard his menial. But
presently, catching hold of the mizen shrouds, he swings himself to the
deck, and in an even, unexhilarated voice, saying, “Dinner, Mr.
Starbuck,” disappears into the cabin.

When the last echo of his sultan’s step has died away, and Starbuck,
the first Emir, has every reason to suppose that he is seated, then
Starbuck rouses from his quietude, takes a few turns along the planks,
and, after a grave peep into the binnacle, says, with some touch of
pleasantness, “Dinner, Mr. Stubb,” and descends the scuttle. The second
Emir lounges about the rigging awhile, and then slightly shaking the
main brace, to see whether it will be all right with that important
rope, he likewise takes up the old burden, and with a rapid “Dinner,
Mr. Flask,” follows after his predecessors.

But the third Emir, now seeing himself all alone on the quarter-deck,
seems to feel relieved from some curious restraint; for, tipping all
sorts of knowing winks in all sorts of directions, and kicking off his
shoes, he strikes into a sharp but noiseless squall of a hornpipe right
over the Grand Turk’s head; and then, by a dexterous sleight, pitching
his cap up into the mizentop for a shelf, he goes down rollicking so
far at least as he remains visible from the deck, reversing all other
processions, by bringing up the rear with music. But ere stepping into
the cabin doorway below, he pauses, ships a new face altogether, and,
then, independent, hilarious little Flask enters King Ahab’s presence,
in the character of Abjectus, or the Slave.

It is not the least among the strange things bred by the intense
artificialness of sea-usages, that while in the open air of the deck
some officers will, upon provocation, bear themselves boldly and
defyingly enough towards their commander; yet, ten to one, let those
very officers the next moment go down to their customary dinner in that
same commander’s cabin, and straightway their inoffensive, not to say
deprecatory and humble air towards him, as he sits at the head of the
table; this is marvellous, sometimes most comical. Wherefore this
difference? A problem? Perhaps not. To have been Belshazzar, King of
Babylon; and to have been Belshazzar, not haughtily but courteously,
therein certainly must have been some touch of mundane grandeur. But he
who in the rightly regal and intelligent spirit presides over his own
private dinner-table of invited guests, that man’s unchallenged power
and dominion of individual influence for the time; that man’s royalty
of state transcends Belshazzar’s, for Belshazzar was not the greatest.
Who has but once dined his friends, has tasted what it is to be Cæsar.
It is a witchery of social czarship which there is no withstanding.
Now, if to this consideration you superadd the official supremacy of a
ship-master, then, by inference, you will derive the cause of that
peculiarity of sea-life just mentioned.

Over his ivory-inlaid table, Ahab presided like a mute, maned sea-lion
on the white coral beach, surrounded by his warlike but still
deferential cubs. In his own proper turn, each officer waited to be
served. They were as little children before Ahab; and yet, in Ahab,
there seemed not to lurk the smallest social arrogance. With one mind,
their intent eyes all fastened upon the old man’s knife, as he carved
the chief dish before him. I do not suppose that for the world they
would have profaned that moment with the slightest observation, even
upon so neutral a topic as the weather. No! And when reaching out his
knife and fork, between which the slice of beef was locked, Ahab
thereby motioned Starbuck’s plate towards him, the mate received his
meat as though receiving alms; and cut it tenderly; and a little
started if, perchance, the knife grazed against the plate; and chewed
it noiselessly; and swallowed it, not without circumspection. For, like
the Coronation banquet at Frankfort, where the German Emperor
profoundly dines with the seven Imperial Electors, so these cabin meals
were somehow solemn meals, eaten in awful silence; and yet at table old
Ahab forbade not conversation; only he himself was dumb. What a relief
it was to choking Stubb, when a rat made a sudden racket in the hold
below. And poor little Flask, he was the youngest son, and little boy
of this weary family party. His were the shinbones of the saline beef;
his would have been the drumsticks. For Flask to have presumed to help
himself, this must have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the
first degree. Had he helped himself at that table, doubtless, never
more would he have been able to hold his head up in this honest world;
nevertheless, strange to say, Ahab never forbade him. And had Flask
helped himself, the chances were Ahab had never so much as noticed it.
Least of all, did Flask presume to help himself to butter. Whether he
thought the owners of the ship denied it to him, on account of its
clotting his clear, sunny complexion; or whether he deemed that, on so
long a voyage in such marketless waters, butter was at a premium, and
therefore was not for him, a subaltern; however it was, Flask, alas!
was a butterless man!

Another thing. Flask was the last person down at the dinner, and Flask
is the first man up. Consider! For hereby Flask’s dinner was badly
jammed in point of time. Starbuck and Stubb both had the start of him;
and yet they also have the privilege of lounging in the rear. If Stubb
even, who is but a peg higher than Flask, happens to have but a small
appetite, and soon shows symptoms of concluding his repast, then Flask
must bestir himself, he will not get more than three mouthfuls that
day; for it is against holy usage for Stubb to precede Flask to the
deck. Therefore it was that Flask once admitted in private, that ever
since he had arisen to the dignity of an officer, from that moment he
had never known what it was to be otherwise than hungry, more or less.
For what he ate did not so much relieve his hunger, as keep it immortal
in him. Peace and satisfaction, thought Flask, have for ever departed
from my stomach. I am an officer; but, how I wish I could fish a bit of
old-fashioned beef in the forecastle, as I used to when I was before
the mast. There’s the fruits of promotion now; there’s the vanity of
glory: there’s the insanity of life! Besides, if it were so that any
mere sailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask in Flask’s
official capacity, all that sailor had to do, in order to obtain ample
vengeance, was to go aft at dinner-time, and get a peep at Flask
through the cabin sky-light, sitting silly and dumfoundered before
awful Ahab.

Now, Ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the first table
in the Pequod’s cabin. After their departure, taking place in inverted
order to their arrival, the canvas cloth was cleared, or rather was
restored to some hurried order by the pallid steward. And then the
three harpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being its residuary
legatees. They made a sort of temporary servants’ hall of the high and
mighty cabin.

In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint and nameless
invisible domineerings of the captain’s table, was the entire care-free
license and ease, the almost frantic democracy of those inferior
fellows the harpooneers. While their masters, the mates, seemed afraid
of the sound of the hinges of their own jaws, the harpooneers chewed
their food with such a relish that there was a report to it. They dined
like lords; they filled their bellies like Indian ships all day loading
with spices. Such portentous appetites had Queequeg and Tashtego, that
to fill out the vacancies made by the previous repast, often the pale
Dough-Boy was fain to bring on a great baron of salt-junk, seemingly
quarried out of the solid ox. And if he were not lively about it, if he
did not go with a nimble hop-skip-and-jump, then Tashtego had an
ungentlemanly way of accelerating him by darting a fork at his back,
harpoon-wise. And once Daggoo, seized with a sudden humor, assisted
Dough-Boy’s memory by snatching him up bodily, and thrusting his head
into a great empty wooden trencher, while Tashtego, knife in hand,
began laying out the circle preliminary to scalping him. He was
naturally a very nervous, shuddering sort of little fellow, this
bread-faced steward; the progeny of a bankrupt baker and a hospital
nurse. And what with the standing spectacle of the black terrific Ahab,
and the periodical tumultuous visitations of these three savages,
Dough-Boy’s whole life was one continual lip-quiver. Commonly, after
seeing the harpooneers furnished with all things they demanded, he
would escape from their clutches into his little pantry adjoining, and
fearfully peep out at them through the blinds of its door, till all was
over.

It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against Tashtego, opposing
his filed teeth to the Indian’s: crosswise to them, Daggoo seated on
the floor, for a bench would have brought his hearse-plumed head to the
low carlines; at every motion of his colossal limbs, making the low
cabin framework to shake, as when an African elephant goes passenger in
a ship. But for all this, the great negro was wonderfully abstemious,
not to say dainty. It seemed hardly possible that by such comparatively
small mouthfuls he could keep up the vitality diffused through so
broad, baronial, and superb a person. But, doubtless, this noble savage
fed strong and drank deep of the abounding element of air; and through
his dilated nostrils snuffed in the sublime life of the worlds. Not by
beef or by bread, are giants made or nourished. But Queequeg, he had a
mortal, barbaric smack of the lip in eating—an ugly sound enough—so
much so, that the trembling Dough-Boy almost looked to see whether any
marks of teeth lurked in his own lean arms. And when he would hear
Tashtego singing out for him to produce himself, that his bones might
be picked, the simple-witted steward all but shattered the crockery
hanging round him in the pantry, by his sudden fits of the palsy. Nor
did the whetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets, for
their lances and other weapons; and with which whetstones, at dinner,
they would ostentatiously sharpen their knives; that grating sound did
not at all tend to tranquillize poor Dough-Boy. How could he forget
that in his Island days, Queequeg, for one, must certainly have been
guilty of some murderous, convivial indiscretions. Alas! Dough-Boy!
hard fares the white waiter who waits upon cannibals. Not a napkin
should he carry on his arm, but a buckler. In good time, though, to his
great delight, the three salt-sea warriors would rise and depart; to
his credulous, fable-mongering ears, all their martial bones jingling
in them at every step, like Moorish scimetars in scabbards.

But, though these barbarians dined in the cabin, and nominally lived
there; still, being anything but sedentary in their habits, they were
scarcely ever in it except at mealtimes, and just before sleeping-time,
when they passed through it to their own peculiar quarters.

In this one matter, Ahab seemed no exception to most American whale
captains, who, as a set, rather incline to the opinion that by rights
the ship’s cabin belongs to them; and that it is by courtesy alone that
anybody else is, at any time, permitted there. So that, in real truth,
the mates and harpooneers of the Pequod might more properly be said to
have lived out of the cabin than in it. For when they did enter it, it
was something as a street-door enters a house; turning inwards for a
moment, only to be turned out the next; and, as a permanent thing,
residing in the open air. Nor did they lose much hereby; in the cabin
was no companionship; socially, Ahab was inaccessible. Though nominally
included in the census of Christendom, he was still an alien to it. He
lived in the world, as the last of the Grisly Bears lived in settled
Missouri. And as when Spring and Summer had departed, that wild Logan
of the woods, burying himself in the hollow of a tree, lived out the
winter there, sucking his own paws; so, in his inclement, howling old
age, Ahab’s soul, shut up in the caved trunk of his body, there fed
upon the sullen paws of its gloom!


CHAPTER 35. The Mast-Head.

It was during the more pleasant weather, that in due rotation with the
other seamen my first mast-head came round.

In most American whalemen the mast-heads are manned almost
simultaneously with the vessel’s leaving her port; even though she may
have fifteen thousand miles, and more, to sail ere reaching her proper
cruising ground. And if, after a three, four, or five years’ voyage she
is drawing nigh home with anything empty in her—say, an empty vial
even—then, her mast-heads are kept manned to the last; and not till her
skysail-poles sail in among the spires of the port, does she altogether
relinquish the hope of capturing one whale more.

Now, as the business of standing mast-heads, ashore or afloat, is a
very ancient and interesting one, let us in some measure expatiate
here. I take it, that the earliest standers of mast-heads were the old
Egyptians; because, in all my researches, I find none prior to them.
For though their progenitors, the builders of Babel, must doubtless, by
their tower, have intended to rear the loftiest mast-head in all Asia,
or Africa either; yet (ere the final truck was put to it) as that great
stone mast of theirs may be said to have gone by the board, in the
dread gale of God’s wrath; therefore, we cannot give these Babel
builders priority over the Egyptians. And that the Egyptians were a
nation of mast-head standers, is an assertion based upon the general
belief among archæologists, that the first pyramids were founded for
astronomical purposes: a theory singularly supported by the peculiar
stair-like formation of all four sides of those edifices; whereby, with
prodigious long upliftings of their legs, those old astronomers were
wont to mount to the apex, and sing out for new stars; even as the
look-outs of a modern ship sing out for a sail, or a whale just bearing
in sight. In Saint Stylites, the famous Christian hermit of old times,
who built him a lofty stone pillar in the desert and spent the whole
latter portion of his life on its summit, hoisting his food from the
ground with a tackle; in him we have a remarkable instance of a
dauntless stander-of-mast-heads; who was not to be driven from his
place by fogs or frosts, rain, hail, or sleet; but valiantly facing
everything out to the last, literally died at his post. Of modern
standers-of-mast-heads we have but a lifeless set; mere stone, iron,
and bronze men; who, though well capable of facing out a stiff gale,
are still entirely incompetent to the business of singing out upon
discovering any strange sight. There is Napoleon; who, upon the top of
the column of Vendome, stands with arms folded, some one hundred and
fifty feet in the air; careless, now, who rules the decks below;
whether Louis Philippe, Louis Blanc, or Louis the Devil. Great
Washington, too, stands high aloft on his towering main-mast in
Baltimore, and like one of Hercules’ pillars, his column marks that
point of human grandeur beyond which few mortals will go. Admiral
Nelson, also, on a capstan of gun-metal, stands his mast-head in
Trafalgar Square; and ever when most obscured by that London smoke,
token is yet given that a hidden hero is there; for where there is
smoke, must be fire. But neither great Washington, nor Napoleon, nor
Nelson, will answer a single hail from below, however madly invoked to
befriend by their counsels the distracted decks upon which they gaze;
however it may be surmised, that their spirits penetrate through the
thick haze of the future, and descry what shoals and what rocks must be
shunned.

It may seem unwarrantable to couple in any respect the mast-head
standers of the land with those of the sea; but that in truth it is not
so, is plainly evinced by an item for which Obed Macy, the sole
historian of Nantucket, stands accountable. The worthy Obed tells us,
that in the early times of the whale fishery, ere ships were regularly
launched in pursuit of the game, the people of that island erected
lofty spars along the sea-coast, to which the look-outs ascended by
means of nailed cleats, something as fowls go upstairs in a hen-house.
A few years ago this same plan was adopted by the Bay whalemen of New
Zealand, who, upon descrying the game, gave notice to the ready-manned
boats nigh the beach. But this custom has now become obsolete; turn we
then to the one proper mast-head, that of a whale-ship at sea. The
three mast-heads are kept manned from sun-rise to sun-set; the seamen
taking their regular turns (as at the helm), and relieving each other
every two hours. In the serene weather of the tropics it is exceedingly
pleasant the mast-head; nay, to a dreamy meditative man it is
delightful. There you stand, a hundred feet above the silent decks,
striding along the deep, as if the masts were gigantic stilts, while
beneath you and between your legs, as it were, swim the hugest monsters
of the sea, even as ships once sailed between the boots of the famous
Colossus at old Rhodes. There you stand, lost in the infinite series of
the sea, with nothing ruffled but the waves. The tranced ship
indolently rolls; the drowsy trade winds blow; everything resolves you
into languor. For the most part, in this tropic whaling life, a sublime
uneventfulness invests you; you hear no news; read no gazettes; extras
with startling accounts of commonplaces never delude you into
unnecessary excitements; you hear of no domestic afflictions; bankrupt
securities; fall of stocks; are never troubled with the thought of what
you shall have for dinner—for all your meals for three years and more
are snugly stowed in casks, and your bill of fare is immutable.

In one of those southern whalesmen, on a long three or four years’
voyage, as often happens, the sum of the various hours you spend at the
mast-head would amount to several entire months. And it is much to be
deplored that the place to which you devote so considerable a portion
of the whole term of your natural life, should be so sadly destitute of
anything approaching to a cosy inhabitiveness, or adapted to breed a
comfortable localness of feeling, such as pertains to a bed, a hammock,
a hearse, a sentry box, a pulpit, a coach, or any other of those small
and snug contrivances in which men temporarily isolate themselves. Your
most usual point of perch is the head of the t’ gallant-mast, where you
stand upon two thin parallel sticks (almost peculiar to whalemen)
called the t’ gallant cross-trees. Here, tossed about by the sea, the
beginner feels about as cosy as he would standing on a bull’s horns. To
be sure, in cold weather you may carry your house aloft with you, in
the shape of a watch-coat; but properly speaking the thickest
watch-coat is no more of a house than the unclad body; for as the soul
is glued inside of its fleshy tabernacle, and cannot freely move about
in it, nor even move out of it, without running great risk of perishing
(like an ignorant pilgrim crossing the snowy Alps in winter); so a
watch-coat is not so much of a house as it is a mere envelope, or
additional skin encasing you. You cannot put a shelf or chest of
drawers in your body, and no more can you make a convenient closet of
your watch-coat.

Concerning all this, it is much to be deplored that the mast-heads of a
southern whale ship are unprovided with those enviable little tents or
pulpits, called _crow’s-nests_, in which the look-outs of a Greenland
whaler are protected from the inclement weather of the frozen seas. In
the fireside narrative of Captain Sleet, entitled “A Voyage among the
Icebergs, in quest of the Greenland Whale, and incidentally for the
re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic Colonies of Old Greenland;” in this
admirable volume, all standers of mast-heads are furnished with a
charmingly circumstantial account of the then recently invented
_crow’s-nest_ of the Glacier, which was the name of Captain Sleet’s
good craft. He called it the _Sleet’s crow’s-nest_, in honor of
himself; he being the original inventor and patentee, and free from all
ridiculous false delicacy, and holding that if we call our own children
after our own names (we fathers being the original inventors and
patentees), so likewise should we denominate after ourselves any other
apparatus we may beget. In shape, the Sleet’s crow’s-nest is something
like a large tierce or pipe; it is open above, however, where it is
furnished with a movable side-screen to keep to windward of your head
in a hard gale. Being fixed on the summit of the mast, you ascend into
it through a little trap-hatch in the bottom. On the after side, or
side next the stern of the ship, is a comfortable seat, with a locker
underneath for umbrellas, comforters, and coats. In front is a leather
rack, in which to keep your speaking trumpet, pipe, telescope, and
other nautical conveniences. When Captain Sleet in person stood his
mast-head in this crow’s-nest of his, he tells us that he always had a
rifle with him (also fixed in the rack), together with a powder flask
and shot, for the purpose of popping off the stray narwhales, or
vagrant sea unicorns infesting those waters; for you cannot
successfully shoot at them from the deck owing to the resistance of the
water, but to shoot down upon them is a very different thing. Now, it
was plainly a labor of love for Captain Sleet to describe, as he does,
all the little detailed conveniences of his crow’s-nest; but though he
so enlarges upon many of these, and though he treats us to a very
scientific account of his experiments in this crow’s-nest, with a small
compass he kept there for the purpose of counteracting the errors
resulting from what is called the “local attraction” of all binnacle
magnets; an error ascribable to the horizontal vicinity of the iron in
the ship’s planks, and in the Glacier’s case, perhaps, to there having
been so many broken-down blacksmiths among her crew; I say, that though
the Captain is very discreet and scientific here, yet, for all his
learned “binnacle deviations,” “azimuth compass observations,” and
“approximate errors,” he knows very well, Captain Sleet, that he was
not so much immersed in those profound magnetic meditations, as to fail
being attracted occasionally towards that well replenished little
case-bottle, so nicely tucked in on one side of his crow’s nest, within
easy reach of his hand. Though, upon the whole, I greatly admire and
even love the brave, the honest, and learned Captain; yet I take it
very ill of him that he should so utterly ignore that case-bottle,
seeing what a faithful friend and comforter it must have been, while
with mittened fingers and hooded head he was studying the mathematics
aloft there in that bird’s nest within three or four perches of the
pole.

But if we Southern whale-fishers are not so snugly housed aloft as
Captain Sleet and his Greenlandmen were; yet that disadvantage is
greatly counter-balanced by the widely contrasting serenity of those
seductive seas in which we South fishers mostly float. For one, I used
to lounge up the rigging very leisurely, resting in the top to have a
chat with Queequeg, or any one else off duty whom I might find there;
then ascending a little way further, and throwing a lazy leg over the
top-sail yard, take a preliminary view of the watery pastures, and so
at last mount to my ultimate destination.

Let me make a clean breast of it here, and frankly admit that I kept
but sorry guard. With the problem of the universe revolving in me, how
could I—being left completely to myself at such a thought-engendering
altitude—how could I but lightly hold my obligations to observe all
whale-ships’ standing orders, “Keep your weather eye open, and sing out
every time.”

And let me in this place movingly admonish you, ye ship-owners of
Nantucket! Beware of enlisting in your vigilant fisheries any lad with
lean brow and hollow eye; given to unseasonable meditativeness; and who
offers to ship with the Phædon instead of Bowditch in his head. Beware
of such an one, I say; your whales must be seen before they can be
killed; and this sunken-eyed young Platonist will tow you ten wakes
round the world, and never make you one pint of sperm the richer. Nor
are these monitions at all unneeded. For nowadays, the whale-fishery
furnishes an asylum for many romantic, melancholy, and absent-minded
young men, disgusted with the carking cares of earth, and seeking
sentiment in tar and blubber. Childe Harold not unfrequently perches
himself upon the mast-head of some luckless disappointed whale-ship,
and in moody phrase ejaculates:—


“Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll! Ten thousand
blubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain.”



Very often do the captains of such ships take those absent-minded young
philosophers to task, upbraiding them with not feeling sufficient
“interest” in the voyage; half-hinting that they are so hopelessly lost
to all honorable ambition, as that in their secret souls they would
rather not see whales than otherwise. But all in vain; those young
Platonists have a notion that their vision is imperfect; they are
short-sighted; what use, then, to strain the visual nerve? They have
left their opera-glasses at home.

“Why, thou monkey,” said a harpooneer to one of these lads, “we’ve been
cruising now hard upon three years, and thou hast not raised a whale
yet. Whales are scarce as hen’s teeth whenever thou art up here.”
Perhaps they were; or perhaps there might have been shoals of them in
the far horizon; but lulled into such an opium-like listlessness of
vacant, unconscious reverie is this absent-minded youth by the blending
cadence of waves with thoughts, that at last he loses his identity;
takes the mystic ocean at his feet for the visible image of that deep,
blue, bottomless soul, pervading mankind and nature; and every strange,
half-seen, gliding, beautiful thing that eludes him; every
dimly-discovered, uprising fin of some undiscernible form, seems to him
the embodiment of those elusive thoughts that only people the soul by
continually flitting through it. In this enchanted mood, thy spirit
ebbs away to whence it came; becomes diffused through time and space;
like Cranmer’s sprinkled Pantheistic ashes, forming at last a part of
every shore the round globe over.

There is no life in thee, now, except that rocking life imparted by a
gently rolling ship; by her, borrowed from the sea; by the sea, from
the inscrutable tides of God. But while this sleep, this dream is on
ye, move your foot or hand an inch; slip your hold at all; and your
identity comes back in horror. Over Descartian vortices you hover. And
perhaps, at mid-day, in the fairest weather, with one half-throttled
shriek you drop through that transparent air into the summer sea, no
more to rise for ever. Heed it well, ye Pantheists!


CHAPTER 36. The Quarter-Deck.

(_Enter Ahab: Then, all._)

It was not a great while after the affair of the pipe, that one morning
shortly after breakfast, Ahab, as was his wont, ascended the
cabin-gangway to the deck. There most sea-captains usually walk at that
hour, as country gentlemen, after the same meal, take a few turns in
the garden.

Soon his steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro he paced his old
rounds, upon planks so familiar to his tread, that they were all over
dented, like geological stones, with the peculiar mark of his walk. Did
you fixedly gaze, too, upon that ribbed and dented brow; there also,
you would see still stranger foot-prints—the foot-prints of his one
unsleeping, ever-pacing thought.

But on the occasion in question, those dents looked deeper, even as his
nervous step that morning left a deeper mark. And, so full of his
thought was Ahab, that at every uniform turn that he made, now at the
main-mast and now at the binnacle, you could almost see that thought
turn in him as he turned, and pace in him as he paced; so completely
possessing him, indeed, that it all but seemed the inward mould of
every outer movement.

“D’ye mark him, Flask?” whispered Stubb; “the chick that’s in him pecks
the shell. ’Twill soon be out.”

The hours wore on;—Ahab now shut up within his cabin; anon, pacing the
deck, with the same intense bigotry of purpose in his aspect.

It drew near the close of day. Suddenly he came to a halt by the
bulwarks, and inserting his bone leg into the auger-hole there, and
with one hand grasping a shroud, he ordered Starbuck to send everybody
aft.

“Sir!” said the mate, astonished at an order seldom or never given on
ship-board except in some extraordinary case.

“Send everybody aft,” repeated Ahab. “Mast-heads, there! come down!”

When the entire ship’s company were assembled, and with curious and not
wholly unapprehensive faces, were eyeing him, for he looked not unlike
the weather horizon when a storm is coming up, Ahab, after rapidly
glancing over the bulwarks, and then darting his eyes among the crew,
started from his standpoint; and as though not a soul were nigh him
resumed his heavy turns upon the deck. With bent head and half-slouched
hat he continued to pace, unmindful of the wondering whispering among
the men; till Stubb cautiously whispered to Flask, that Ahab must have
summoned them there for the purpose of witnessing a pedestrian feat.
But this did not last long. Vehemently pausing, he cried:—

“What do ye do when ye see a whale, men?”

“Sing out for him!” was the impulsive rejoinder from a score of clubbed
voices.

“Good!” cried Ahab, with a wild approval in his tones; observing the
hearty animation into which his unexpected question had so magnetically
thrown them.

“And what do ye next, men?”

“Lower away, and after him!”

“And what tune is it ye pull to, men?”

“A dead whale or a stove boat!”

More and more strangely and fiercely glad and approving, grew the
countenance of the old man at every shout; while the mariners began to
gaze curiously at each other, as if marvelling how it was that they
themselves became so excited at such seemingly purposeless questions.

But, they were all eagerness again, as Ahab, now half-revolving in his
pivot-hole, with one hand reaching high up a shroud, and tightly,
almost convulsively grasping it, addressed them thus:—

“All ye mast-headers have before now heard me give orders about a white
whale. Look ye! d’ye see this Spanish ounce of gold?”—holding up a
broad bright coin to the sun—“it is a sixteen dollar piece, men. D’ye
see it? Mr. Starbuck, hand me yon top-maul.”

While the mate was getting the hammer, Ahab, without speaking, was
slowly rubbing the gold piece against the skirts of his jacket, as if
to heighten its lustre, and without using any words was meanwhile lowly
humming to himself, producing a sound so strangely muffled and
inarticulate that it seemed the mechanical humming of the wheels of his
vitality in him.

Receiving the top-maul from Starbuck, he advanced towards the main-mast
with the hammer uplifted in one hand, exhibiting the gold with the
other, and with a high raised voice exclaiming: “Whosoever of ye raises
me a white-headed whale with a wrinkled brow and a crooked jaw;
whosoever of ye raises me that white-headed whale, with three holes
punctured in his starboard fluke—look ye, whosoever of ye raises me
that same white whale, he shall have this gold ounce, my boys!”

“Huzza! huzza!” cried the seamen, as with swinging tarpaulins they
hailed the act of nailing the gold to the mast.

“It’s a white whale, I say,” resumed Ahab, as he threw down the
topmaul: “a white whale. Skin your eyes for him, men; look sharp for
white water; if ye see but a bubble, sing out.”

All this while Tashtego, Daggoo, and Queequeg had looked on with even
more intense interest and surprise than the rest, and at the mention of
the wrinkled brow and crooked jaw they had started as if each was
separately touched by some specific recollection.

“Captain Ahab,” said Tashtego, “that white whale must be the same that
some call Moby Dick.”

“Moby Dick?” shouted Ahab. “Do ye know the white whale then, Tash?”

“Does he fan-tail a little curious, sir, before he goes down?” said the
Gay-Header deliberately.

“And has he a curious spout, too,” said Daggoo, “very bushy, even for a
parmacetty, and mighty quick, Captain Ahab?”

“And he have one, two, three—oh! good many iron in him hide, too,
Captain,” cried Queequeg disjointedly, “all twiske-tee be-twisk, like
him—him—” faltering hard for a word, and screwing his hand round and
round as though uncorking a bottle—“like him—him—”

“Corkscrew!” cried Ahab, “aye, Queequeg, the harpoons lie all twisted
and wrenched in him; aye, Daggoo, his spout is a big one, like a whole
shock of wheat, and white as a pile of our Nantucket wool after the
great annual sheep-shearing; aye, Tashtego, and he fan-tails like a
split jib in a squall. Death and devils! men, it is Moby Dick ye have
seen—Moby Dick—Moby Dick!”

“Captain Ahab,” said Starbuck, who, with Stubb and Flask, had thus far
been eyeing his superior with increasing surprise, but at last seemed
struck with a thought which somewhat explained all the wonder. “Captain
Ahab, I have heard of Moby Dick—but it was not Moby Dick that took off
thy leg?”

“Who told thee that?” cried Ahab; then pausing, “Aye, Starbuck; aye, my
hearties all round; it was Moby Dick that dismasted me; Moby Dick that
brought me to this dead stump I stand on now. Aye, aye,” he shouted
with a terrific, loud, animal sob, like that of a heart-stricken moose;
“Aye, aye! it was that accursed white whale that razeed me; made a poor
pegging lubber of me for ever and a day!” Then tossing both arms, with
measureless imprecations he shouted out: “Aye, aye! and I’ll chase him
round Good Hope, and round the Horn, and round the Norway Maelstrom,
and round perdition’s flames before I give him up. And this is what ye
have shipped for, men! to chase that white whale on both sides of land,
and over all sides of earth, till he spouts black blood and rolls fin
out. What say ye, men, will ye splice hands on it, now? I think ye do
look brave.”

“Aye, aye!” shouted the harpooneers and seamen, running closer to the
excited old man: “A sharp eye for the white whale; a sharp lance for
Moby Dick!”

“God bless ye,” he seemed to half sob and half shout. “God bless ye,
men. Steward! go draw the great measure of grog. But what’s this long
face about, Mr. Starbuck; wilt thou not chase the white whale? art not
game for Moby Dick?”

“I am game for his crooked jaw, and for the jaws of Death too, Captain
Ahab, if it fairly comes in the way of the business we follow; but I
came here to hunt whales, not my commander’s vengeance. How many
barrels will thy vengeance yield thee even if thou gettest it, Captain
Ahab? it will not fetch thee much in our Nantucket market.”

“Nantucket market! Hoot! But come closer, Starbuck; thou requirest a
little lower layer. If money’s to be the measurer, man, and the
accountants have computed their great counting-house the globe, by
girdling it with guineas, one to every three parts of an inch; then,
let me tell thee, that my vengeance will fetch a great premium _here!_”

“He smites his chest,” whispered Stubb, “what’s that for? methinks it
rings most vast, but hollow.”

“Vengeance on a dumb brute!” cried Starbuck, “that simply smote thee
from blindest instinct! Madness! To be enraged with a dumb thing,
Captain Ahab, seems blasphemous.”

“Hark ye yet again—the little lower layer. All visible objects, man,
are but as pasteboard masks. But in each event—in the living act, the
undoubted deed—there, some unknown but still reasoning thing puts forth
the mouldings of its features from behind the unreasoning mask. If man
will strike, strike through the mask! How can the prisoner reach
outside except by thrusting through the wall? To me, the white whale is
that wall, shoved near to me. Sometimes I think there’s naught beyond.
But ’tis enough. He tasks me; he heaps me; I see in him outrageous
strength, with an inscrutable malice sinewing it. That inscrutable
thing is chiefly what I hate; and be the white whale agent, or be the
white whale principal, I will wreak that hate upon him. Talk not to me
of blasphemy, man; I’d strike the sun if it insulted me. For could the
sun do that, then could I do the other; since there is ever a sort of
fair play herein, jealousy presiding over all creations. But not my
master, man, is even that fair play. Who’s over me? Truth hath no
confines. Take off thine eye! more intolerable than fiends’ glarings is
a doltish stare! So, so; thou reddenest and palest; my heat has melted
thee to anger-glow. But look ye, Starbuck, what is said in heat, that
thing unsays itself. There are men from whom warm words are small
indignity. I meant not to incense thee. Let it go. Look! see yonder
Turkish cheeks of spotted tawn—living, breathing pictures painted by
the sun. The Pagan leopards—the unrecking and unworshipping things,
that live; and seek, and give no reasons for the torrid life they feel!
The crew, man, the crew! Are they not one and all with Ahab, in this
matter of the whale? See Stubb! he laughs! See yonder Chilian! he
snorts to think of it. Stand up amid the general hurricane, thy one
tost sapling cannot, Starbuck! And what is it? Reckon it. ’Tis but to
help strike a fin; no wondrous feat for Starbuck. What is it more? From
this one poor hunt, then, the best lance out of all Nantucket, surely
he will not hang back, when every foremast-hand has clutched a
whetstone? Ah! constrainings seize thee; I see! the billow lifts thee!
Speak, but speak!—Aye, aye! thy silence, then, _that_ voices thee.
(_Aside_) Something shot from my dilated nostrils, he has inhaled it in
his lungs. Starbuck now is mine; cannot oppose me now, without
rebellion.”

“God keep me!—keep us all!” murmured Starbuck, lowly.

But in his joy at the enchanted, tacit acquiescence of the mate, Ahab
did not hear his foreboding invocation; nor yet the low laugh from the
hold; nor yet the presaging vibrations of the winds in the cordage; nor
yet the hollow flap of the sails against the masts, as for a moment
their hearts sank in. For again Starbuck’s downcast eyes lighted up
with the stubbornness of life; the subterranean laugh died away; the
winds blew on; the sails filled out; the ship heaved and rolled as
before. Ah, ye admonitions and warnings! why stay ye not when ye come?
But rather are ye predictions than warnings, ye shadows! Yet not so
much predictions from without, as verifications of the foregoing things
within. For with little external to constrain us, the innermost
necessities in our being, these still drive us on.

“The measure! the measure!” cried Ahab.

Receiving the brimming pewter, and turning to the harpooneers, he
ordered them to produce their weapons. Then ranging them before him
near the capstan, with their harpoons in their hands, while his three
mates stood at his side with their lances, and the rest of the ship’s
company formed a circle round the group; he stood for an instant
searchingly eyeing every man of his crew. But those wild eyes met his,
as the bloodshot eyes of the prairie wolves meet the eye of their
leader, ere he rushes on at their head in the trail of the bison; but,
alas! only to fall into the hidden snare of the Indian.

“Drink and pass!” he cried, handing the heavy charged flagon to the
nearest seaman. “The crew alone now drink. Round with it, round! Short
draughts—long swallows, men; ’tis hot as Satan’s hoof. So, so; it goes
round excellently. It spiralizes in ye; forks out at the
serpent-snapping eye. Well done; almost drained. That way it went, this
way it comes. Hand it me—here’s a hollow! Men, ye seem the years; so
brimming life is gulped and gone. Steward, refill!

“Attend now, my braves. I have mustered ye all round this capstan; and
ye mates, flank me with your lances; and ye harpooneers, stand there
with your irons; and ye, stout mariners, ring me in, that I may in some
sort revive a noble custom of my fisherman fathers before me. O men,
you will yet see that—Ha! boy, come back? bad pennies come not sooner.
Hand it me. Why, now, this pewter had run brimming again, wer’t not
thou St. Vitus’ imp—away, thou ague!

“Advance, ye mates! Cross your lances full before me. Well done! Let me
touch the axis.” So saying, with extended arm, he grasped the three
level, radiating lances at their crossed centre; while so doing,
suddenly and nervously twitched them; meanwhile, glancing intently from
Starbuck to Stubb; from Stubb to Flask. It seemed as though, by some
nameless, interior volition, he would fain have shocked into them the
same fiery emotion accumulated within the Leyden jar of his own
magnetic life. The three mates quailed before his strong, sustained,
and mystic aspect. Stubb and Flask looked sideways from him; the honest
eye of Starbuck fell downright.

“In vain!” cried Ahab; “but, maybe, ’tis well. For did ye three but
once take the full-forced shock, then mine own electric thing, _that_
had perhaps expired from out me. Perchance, too, it would have dropped
ye dead. Perchance ye need it not. Down lances! And now, ye mates, I do
appoint ye three cupbearers to my three pagan kinsmen there—yon three
most honorable gentlemen and noblemen, my valiant harpooneers. Disdain
the task? What, when the great Pope washes the feet of beggars, using
his tiara for ewer? Oh, my sweet cardinals! your own condescension,
_that_ shall bend ye to it. I do not order ye; ye will it. Cut your
seizings and draw the poles, ye harpooneers!”

Silently obeying the order, the three harpooneers now stood with the
detached iron part of their harpoons, some three feet long, held, barbs
up, before him.

“Stab me not with that keen steel! Cant them; cant them over! know ye
not the goblet end? Turn up the socket! So, so; now, ye cup-bearers,
advance. The irons! take them; hold them while I fill!” Forthwith,
slowly going from one officer to the other, he brimmed the harpoon
sockets with the fiery waters from the pewter.

“Now, three to three, ye stand. Commend the murderous chalices! Bestow
them, ye who are now made parties to this indissoluble league. Ha!
Starbuck! but the deed is done! Yon ratifying sun now waits to sit upon
it. Drink, ye harpooneers! drink and swear, ye men that man the
deathful whaleboat’s bow—Death to Moby Dick! God hunt us all, if we do
not hunt Moby Dick to his death!” The long, barbed steel goblets were
lifted; and to cries and maledictions against the white whale, the
spirits were simultaneously quaffed down with a hiss. Starbuck paled,
and turned, and shivered. Once more, and finally, the replenished
pewter went the rounds among the frantic crew; when, waving his free
hand to them, they all dispersed; and Ahab retired within his cabin.


CHAPTER 37. Sunset.

_The cabin; by the stern windows; Ahab sitting alone, and gazing out_.

I leave a white and turbid wake; pale waters, paler cheeks, where’er I
sail. The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm my track; let them;
but first I pass.

Yonder, by ever-brimming goblet’s rim, the warm waves blush like wine.
The gold brow plumbs the blue. The diver sun—slow dived from noon—goes
down; my soul mounts up! she wearies with her endless hill. Is, then,
the crown too heavy that I wear? this Iron Crown of Lombardy. Yet is it
bright with many a gem; I the wearer, see not its far flashings; but
darkly feel that I wear that, that dazzlingly confounds. ’Tis iron—that
I know—not gold. ’Tis split, too—that I feel; the jagged edge galls me
so, my brain seems to beat against the solid metal; aye, steel skull,
mine; the sort that needs no helmet in the most brain-battering fight!

Dry heat upon my brow? Oh! time was, when as the sunrise nobly spurred
me, so the sunset soothed. No more. This lovely light, it lights not
me; all loveliness is anguish to me, since I can ne’er enjoy. Gifted
with the high perception, I lack the low, enjoying power; damned, most
subtly and most malignantly! damned in the midst of Paradise! Good
night—good night! (_waving his hand, he moves from the window_.)

’Twas not so hard a task. I thought to find one stubborn, at the least;
but my one cogged circle fits into all their various wheels, and they
revolve. Or, if you will, like so many ant-hills of powder, they all
stand before me; and I their match. Oh, hard! that to fire others, the
match itself must needs be wasting! What I’ve dared, I’ve willed; and
what I’ve willed, I’ll do! They think me mad—Starbuck does; but I’m
demoniac, I am madness maddened! That wild madness that’s only calm to
comprehend itself! The prophecy was that I should be dismembered;
and—Aye! I lost this leg. I now prophesy that I will dismember my
dismemberer. Now, then, be the prophet and the fulfiller one. That’s
more than ye, ye great gods, ever were. I laugh and hoot at ye, ye
cricket-players, ye pugilists, ye deaf Burkes and blinded Bendigoes! I
will not say as schoolboys do to bullies—Take some one of your own
size; don’t pommel _me!_ No, ye’ve knocked me down, and I am up again;
but _ye_ have run and hidden. Come forth from behind your cotton bags!
I have no long gun to reach ye. Come, Ahab’s compliments to ye; come
and see if ye can swerve me. Swerve me? ye cannot swerve me, else ye
swerve yourselves! man has ye there. Swerve me? The path to my fixed
purpose is laid with iron rails, whereon my soul is grooved to run.
Over unsounded gorges, through the rifled hearts of mountains, under
torrents’ beds, unerringly I rush! Naught’s an obstacle, naught’s an
angle to the iron way!


CHAPTER 38. Dusk.

_By the Mainmast; Starbuck leaning against it_.

My soul is more than matched; she’s overmanned; and by a madman!
Insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field! But
he drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me! I think I
see his impious end; but feel that I must help him to it. Will I, nill
I, the ineffable thing has tied me to him; tows me with a cable I have
no knife to cut. Horrible old man! Who’s over him, he cries;—aye, he
would be a democrat to all above; look, how he lords it over all below!
Oh! I plainly see my miserable office,—to obey, rebelling; and worse
yet, to hate with touch of pity! For in his eyes I read some lurid woe
would shrivel me up, had I it. Yet is there hope. Time and tide flow
wide. The hated whale has the round watery world to swim in, as the
small gold-fish has its glassy globe. His heaven-insulting purpose, God
may wedge aside. I would up heart, were it not like lead. But my whole
clock’s run down; my heart the all-controlling weight, I have no key to
lift again.

[_A burst of revelry from the forecastle_.]

Oh, God! to sail with such a heathen crew that have small touch of
human mothers in them! Whelped somewhere by the sharkish sea. The white
whale is their demigorgon. Hark! the infernal orgies! that revelry is
forward! mark the unfaltering silence aft! Methinks it pictures life.
Foremost through the sparkling sea shoots on the gay, embattled,
bantering bow, but only to drag dark Ahab after it, where he broods
within his sternward cabin, builded over the dead water of the wake,
and further on, hunted by its wolfish gurglings. The long howl thrills
me through! Peace! ye revellers, and set the watch! Oh, life! ’tis in
an hour like this, with soul beat down and held to knowledge,—as wild,
untutored things are forced to feed—Oh, life! ’tis now that I do feel
the latent horror in thee! but ’tis not me! that horror’s out of me!
and with the soft feeling of the human in me, yet will I try to fight
ye, ye grim, phantom futures! Stand by me, hold me, bind me, O ye
blessed influences!


CHAPTER 39. First Night-Watch.

Fore-Top.

(_Stubb solus, and mending a brace_.)

Ha! ha! ha! ha! hem! clear my throat!—I’ve been thinking over it ever
since, and that ha, ha’s the final consequence. Why so? Because a
laugh’s the wisest, easiest answer to all that’s queer; and come what
will, one comfort’s always left—that unfailing comfort is, it’s all
predestinated. I heard not all his talk with Starbuck; but to my poor
eye Starbuck then looked something as I the other evening felt. Be sure
the old Mogul has fixed him, too. I twigged it, knew it; had had the
gift, might readily have prophesied it—for when I clapped my eye upon
his skull I saw it. Well, Stubb, _wise_ Stubb—that’s my title—well,
Stubb, what of it, Stubb? Here’s a carcase. I know not all that may be
coming, but be it what it will, I’ll go to it laughing. Such a waggish
leering as lurks in all your horribles! I feel funny. Fa, la! lirra,
skirra! What’s my juicy little pear at home doing now? Crying its eyes
out?—Giving a party to the last arrived harpooneers, I dare say, gay as
a frigate’s pennant, and so am I—fa, la! lirra, skirra! Oh—


We’ll drink to-night with hearts as light, To love, as gay and fleeting
As bubbles that swim, on the beaker’s brim, And break on the lips while
meeting.



A brave stave that—who calls? Mr. Starbuck? Aye, aye, sir—(_Aside_)
he’s my superior, he has his too, if I’m not mistaken.—Aye, aye, sir,
just through with this job—coming.


CHAPTER 40. Midnight, Forecastle.

HARPOONEERS AND SAILORS.

(_Foresail rises and discovers the watch standing, lounging, leaning,
and lying in various attitudes, all singing in chorus_.)


  Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies! Farewell and adieu to you,
  ladies of Spain! Our captain’s commanded.—



1ST NANTUCKET SAILOR. Oh, boys, don’t be sentimental; it’s bad for the
digestion! Take a tonic, follow me!

(_Sings, and all follow._)


 Our captain stood upon the deck, A spy-glass in his hand, A viewing of
 those gallant whales That blew at every strand. Oh, your tubs in your
 boats, my boys, And by your braces stand, And we’ll have one of those
 fine whales, Hand, boys, over hand! So, be cheery, my lads! may your
 hearts never fail! While the bold harpooner is striking the whale!



MATE’S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK. Eight bells there, forward!

2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR. Avast the chorus! Eight bells there! d’ye hear,
bell-boy? Strike the bell eight, thou Pip! thou blackling! and let me
call the watch. I’ve the sort of mouth for that—the hogshead mouth. So,
so, (_thrusts his head down the scuttle_,) Star-bo-l-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y!
Eight bells there below! Tumble up!

DUTCH SAILOR. Grand snoozing to-night, maty; fat night for that. I mark
this in our old Mogul’s wine; it’s quite as deadening to some as
filliping to others. We sing; they sleep—aye, lie down there, like
ground-tier butts. At ’em again! There, take this copper-pump, and hail
’em through it. Tell ’em to avast dreaming of their lasses. Tell ’em
it’s the resurrection; they must kiss their last, and come to judgment.
That’s the way—_that’s_ it; thy throat ain’t spoiled with eating
Amsterdam butter.

FRENCH SAILOR. Hist, boys! let’s have a jig or two before we ride to
anchor in Blanket Bay. What say ye? There comes the other watch. Stand
by all legs! Pip! little Pip! hurrah with your tambourine!

PIP. (_Sulky and sleepy._) Don’t know where it is.

FRENCH SAILOR. Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears. Jig it, men, I
say; merry’s the word; hurrah! Damn me, won’t you dance? Form, now,
Indian-file, and gallop into the double-shuffle? Throw yourselves!
Legs! legs!

ICELAND SAILOR. I don’t like your floor, maty; it’s too springy to my
taste. I’m used to ice-floors. I’m sorry to throw cold water on the
subject; but excuse me.

MALTESE SAILOR. Me too; where’s your girls? Who but a fool would take
his left hand by his right, and say to himself, how d’ye do? Partners!
I must have partners!

SICILIAN SAILOR. Aye; girls and a green!—then I’ll hop with ye; yea,
turn grasshopper!

LONG-ISLAND SAILOR. Well, well, ye sulkies, there’s plenty more of us.
Hoe corn when you may, say I. All legs go to harvest soon. Ah! here
comes the music; now for it!

AZORE SAILOR. (_Ascending, and pitching the tambourine up the
scuttle_.) Here you are, Pip; and there’s the windlass-bitts; up you
mount! Now, boys! (_The half of them dance to the tambourine; some go
below; some sleep or lie among the coils of rigging. Oaths a-plenty_.)

AZORE SAILOR. (_Dancing_) Go it, Pip! Bang it, bell-boy! Rig it, dig
it, stig it, quig it, bell-boy! Make fire-flies; break the jinglers!

PIP. Jinglers, you say?—there goes another, dropped off; I pound it so.

CHINA SAILOR. Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away; make a pagoda of
thyself.

FRENCH SAILOR. Merry-mad! Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump through
it! Split jibs! tear yourselves!

TASHTEGO. (_Quietly smoking._) That’s a white man; he calls that fun:
humph! I save my sweat.

OLD MANX SAILOR. I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what
they are dancing over. I’ll dance over your grave, I will—that’s the
bitterest threat of your night-women, that beat head-winds round
corners. O Christ! to think of the green navies and the green-skulled
crews! Well, well; belike the whole world’s a ball, as you scholars
have it; and so ’tis right to make one ballroom of it. Dance on, lads,
you’re young; I was once.

3D NANTUCKET SAILOR. Spell oh!—whew! this is worse than pulling after
whales in a calm—give us a whiff, Tash.

(_They cease dancing, and gather in clusters. Meantime the sky
darkens—the wind rises_.)

LASCAR SAILOR. By Brahma! boys, it’ll be douse sail soon. The sky-born,
high-tide Ganges turned to wind! Thou showest thy black brow, Seeva!

MALTESE SAILOR. (_Reclining and shaking his cap_.) It’s the waves—the
snow’s caps turn to jig it now. They’ll shake their tassels soon. Now
would all the waves were women, then I’d go drown, and chassee with
them evermore! There’s naught so sweet on earth—heaven may not match
it!—as those swift glances of warm, wild bosoms in the dance, when the
over-arboring arms hide such ripe, bursting grapes.

SICILIAN SAILOR. (_Reclining_.) Tell me not of it! Hark ye, lad—fleet
interlacings of the limbs—lithe swayings—coyings—flutterings! lip!
heart! hip! all graze: unceasing touch and go! not taste, observe ye,
else come satiety. Eh, Pagan? (_Nudging_.)

TAHITAN SAILOR. (_Reclining on a mat_.) Hail, holy nakedness of our
dancing girls!—the Heeva-Heeva! Ah! low veiled, high palmed Tahiti! I
still rest me on thy mat, but the soft soil has slid! I saw thee woven
in the wood, my mat! green the first day I brought ye thence; now worn
and wilted quite. Ah me!—not thou nor I can bear the change! How then,
if so be transplanted to yon sky? Hear I the roaring streams from
Pirohitee’s peak of spears, when they leap down the crags and drown the
villages?—The blast! the blast! Up, spine, and meet it! (_Leaps to his
feet_.)

PORTUGUESE SAILOR. How the sea rolls swashing ’gainst the side! Stand
by for reefing, hearties! the winds are just crossing swords, pell-mell
they’ll go lunging presently.

DANISH SAILOR. Crack, crack, old ship! so long as thou crackest, thou
holdest! Well done! The mate there holds ye to it stiffly. He’s no more
afraid than the isle fort at Cattegat, put there to fight the Baltic
with storm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes!

4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR. He has his orders, mind ye that. I heard old Ahab
tell him he must always kill a squall, something as they burst a
waterspout with a pistol—fire your ship right into it!

ENGLISH SAILOR. Blood! but that old man’s a grand old cove! We are the
lads to hunt him up his whale!

ALL. Aye! aye!

OLD MANX SAILOR. How the three pines shake! Pines are the hardest sort
of tree to live when shifted to any other soil, and here there’s none
but the crew’s cursed clay. Steady, helmsman! steady. This is the sort
of weather when brave hearts snap ashore, and keeled hulls split at
sea. Our captain has his birthmark; look yonder, boys, there’s another
in the sky—lurid-like, ye see, all else pitch black.

DAGGOO. What of that? Who’s afraid of black’s afraid of me! I’m
quarried out of it!

SPANISH SAILOR. (_Aside_.) He wants to bully, ah!—the old grudge makes
me touchy (_Advancing_.) Aye, harpooneer, thy race is the undeniable
dark side of mankind—devilish dark at that. No offence.

DAGGOO (_grimly_). None.

ST. JAGO’S SAILOR. That Spaniard’s mad or drunk. But that can’t be, or
else in his one case our old Mogul’s fire-waters are somewhat long in
working.

5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR. What’s that I saw—lightning? Yes.

SPANISH SAILOR. No; Daggoo showing his teeth.

DAGGOO (_springing_). Swallow thine, mannikin! White skin, white liver!

SPANISH SAILOR (_meeting him_). Knife thee heartily! big frame, small
spirit!

ALL. A row! a row! a row!

TASHTEGO (_with a whiff_). A row a’low, and a row aloft—Gods and
men—both brawlers! Humph!

BELFAST SAILOR. A row! arrah a row! The Virgin be blessed, a row!
Plunge in with ye!

ENGLISH SAILOR. Fair play! Snatch the Spaniard’s knife! A ring, a ring!

OLD MANX SAILOR. Ready formed. There! the ringed horizon. In that ring
Cain struck Abel. Sweet work, right work! No? Why then, God, mad’st
thou the ring?

MATE’S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK. Hands by the halyards! in
top-gallant sails! Stand by to reef topsails!

ALL. The squall! the squall! jump, my jollies! (_They scatter_.)

PIP (_shrinking under the windlass_). Jollies? Lord help such jollies!
Crish, crash! there goes the jib-stay! Blang-whang! God! Duck lower,
Pip, here comes the royal yard! It’s worse than being in the whirled
woods, the last day of the year! Who’d go climbing after chestnuts now?
But there they go, all cursing, and here I don’t. Fine prospects to
’em; they’re on the road to heaven. Hold on hard! Jimmini, what a
squall! But those chaps there are worse yet—they are your white
squalls, they. White squalls? white whale, shirr! shirr! Here have I
heard all their chat just now, and the white whale—shirr! shirr!—but
spoken of once! and only this evening—it makes me jingle all over like
my tambourine—that anaconda of an old man swore ’em in to hunt him! Oh,
thou big white God aloft there somewhere in yon darkness, have mercy on
this small black boy down here; preserve him from all men that have no
bowels to feel fear!


CHAPTER 41. Moby Dick.

I, Ishmael, was one of that crew; my shouts had gone up with the rest;
my oath had been welded with theirs; and stronger I shouted, and more
did I hammer and clinch my oath, because of the dread in my soul. A
wild, mystical, sympathetical feeling was in me; Ahab’s quenchless feud
seemed mine. With greedy ears I learned the history of that murderous
monster against whom I and all the others had taken our oaths of
violence and revenge.

For some time past, though at intervals only, the unaccompanied,
secluded White Whale had haunted those uncivilized seas mostly
frequented by the Sperm Whale fishermen. But not all of them knew of
his existence; only a few of them, comparatively, had knowingly seen
him; while the number who as yet had actually and knowingly given
battle to him, was small indeed. For, owing to the large number of
whale-cruisers; the disorderly way they were sprinkled over the entire
watery circumference, many of them adventurously pushing their quest
along solitary latitudes, so as seldom or never for a whole twelvemonth
or more on a stretch, to encounter a single news-telling sail of any
sort; the inordinate length of each separate voyage; the irregularity
of the times of sailing from home; all these, with other circumstances,
direct and indirect, long obstructed the spread through the whole
world-wide whaling-fleet of the special individualizing tidings
concerning Moby Dick. It was hardly to be doubted, that several vessels
reported to have encountered, at such or such a time, or on such or
such a meridian, a Sperm Whale of uncommon magnitude and malignity,
which whale, after doing great mischief to his assailants, had
completely escaped them; to some minds it was not an unfair
presumption, I say, that the whale in question must have been no other
than Moby Dick. Yet as of late the Sperm Whale fishery had been marked
by various and not unfrequent instances of great ferocity, cunning, and
malice in the monster attacked; therefore it was, that those who by
accident ignorantly gave battle to Moby Dick; such hunters, perhaps,
for the most part, were content to ascribe the peculiar terror he bred,
more, as it were, to the perils of the Sperm Whale fishery at large,
than to the individual cause. In that way, mostly, the disastrous
encounter between Ahab and the whale had hitherto been popularly
regarded.

And as for those who, previously hearing of the White Whale, by chance
caught sight of him; in the beginning of the thing they had every one
of them, almost, as boldly and fearlessly lowered for him, as for any
other whale of that species. But at length, such calamities did ensue
in these assaults—not restricted to sprained wrists and ankles, broken
limbs, or devouring amputations—but fatal to the last degree of
fatality; those repeated disastrous repulses, all accumulating and
piling their terrors upon Moby Dick; those things had gone far to shake
the fortitude of many brave hunters, to whom the story of the White
Whale had eventually come.

Nor did wild rumors of all sorts fail to exaggerate, and still the more
horrify the true histories of these deadly encounters. For not only do
fabulous rumors naturally grow out of the very body of all surprising
terrible events,—as the smitten tree gives birth to its fungi; but, in
maritime life, far more than in that of terra firma, wild rumors
abound, wherever there is any adequate reality for them to cling to.
And as the sea surpasses the land in this matter, so the whale fishery
surpasses every other sort of maritime life, in the wonderfulness and
fearfulness of the rumors which sometimes circulate there. For not only
are whalemen as a body unexempt from that ignorance and
superstitiousness hereditary to all sailors; but of all sailors, they
are by all odds the most directly brought into contact with whatever is
appallingly astonishing in the sea; face to face they not only eye its
greatest marvels, but, hand to jaw, give battle to them. Alone, in such
remotest waters, that though you sailed a thousand miles, and passed a
thousand shores, you would not come to any chiseled hearth-stone, or
aught hospitable beneath that part of the sun; in such latitudes and
longitudes, pursuing too such a calling as he does, the whaleman is
wrapped by influences all tending to make his fancy pregnant with many
a mighty birth.

No wonder, then, that ever gathering volume from the mere transit over
the widest watery spaces, the outblown rumors of the White Whale did in
the end incorporate with themselves all manner of morbid hints, and
half-formed fœtal suggestions of supernatural agencies, which
eventually invested Moby Dick with new terrors unborrowed from anything
that visibly appears. So that in many cases such a panic did he finally
strike, that few who by those rumors, at least, had heard of the White
Whale, few of those hunters were willing to encounter the perils of his
jaw.

But there were still other and more vital practical influences at work.
Not even at the present day has the original prestige of the Sperm
Whale, as fearfully distinguished from all other species of the
leviathan, died out of the minds of the whalemen as a body. There are
those this day among them, who, though intelligent and courageous
enough in offering battle to the Greenland or Right whale, would
perhaps—either from professional inexperience, or incompetency, or
timidity, decline a contest with the Sperm Whale; at any rate, there
are plenty of whalemen, especially among those whaling nations not
sailing under the American flag, who have never hostilely encountered
the Sperm Whale, but whose sole knowledge of the leviathan is
restricted to the ignoble monster primitively pursued in the North;
seated on their hatches, these men will hearken with a childish
fireside interest and awe, to the wild, strange tales of Southern
whaling. Nor is the pre-eminent tremendousness of the great Sperm Whale
anywhere more feelingly comprehended, than on board of those prows
which stem him.

And as if the now tested reality of his might had in former legendary
times thrown its shadow before it; we find some book
naturalists—Olassen and Povelson—declaring the Sperm Whale not only to
be a consternation to every other creature in the sea, but also to be
so incredibly ferocious as continually to be athirst for human blood.
Nor even down to so late a time as Cuvier’s, were these or almost
similar impressions effaced. For in his Natural History, the Baron
himself affirms that at sight of the Sperm Whale, all fish (sharks
included) are “struck with the most lively terrors,” and “often in the
precipitancy of their flight dash themselves against the rocks with
such violence as to cause instantaneous death.” And however the general
experiences in the fishery may amend such reports as these; yet in
their full terribleness, even to the bloodthirsty item of Povelson, the
superstitious belief in them is, in some vicissitudes of their
vocation, revived in the minds of the hunters.

So that overawed by the rumors and portents concerning him, not a few
of the fishermen recalled, in reference to Moby Dick, the earlier days
of the Sperm Whale fishery, when it was oftentimes hard to induce long
practised Right whalemen to embark in the perils of this new and daring
warfare; such men protesting that although other leviathans might be
hopefully pursued, yet to chase and point lance at such an apparition
as the Sperm Whale was not for mortal man. That to attempt it, would be
inevitably to be torn into a quick eternity. On this head, there are
some remarkable documents that may be consulted.

Nevertheless, some there were, who even in the face of these things
were ready to give chase to Moby Dick; and a still greater number who,
chancing only to hear of him distantly and vaguely, without the
specific details of any certain calamity, and without superstitious
accompaniments, were sufficiently hardy not to flee from the battle if
offered.

One of the wild suggestions referred to, as at last coming to be linked
with the White Whale in the minds of the superstitiously inclined, was
the unearthly conceit that Moby Dick was ubiquitous; that he had
actually been encountered in opposite latitudes at one and the same
instant of time.

Nor, credulous as such minds must have been, was this conceit
altogether without some faint show of superstitious probability. For as
the secrets of the currents in the seas have never yet been divulged,
even to the most erudite research; so the hidden ways of the Sperm
Whale when beneath the surface remain, in great part, unaccountable to
his pursuers; and from time to time have originated the most curious
and contradictory speculations regarding them, especially concerning
the mystic modes whereby, after sounding to a great depth, he
transports himself with such vast swiftness to the most widely distant
points.

It is a thing well known to both American and English whale-ships, and
as well a thing placed upon authoritative record years ago by Scoresby,
that some whales have been captured far north in the Pacific, in whose
bodies have been found the barbs of harpoons darted in the Greenland
seas. Nor is it to be gainsaid, that in some of these instances it has
been declared that the interval of time between the two assaults could
not have exceeded very many days. Hence, by inference, it has been
believed by some whalemen, that the Nor’ West Passage, so long a
problem to man, was never a problem to the whale. So that here, in the
real living experience of living men, the prodigies related in old
times of the inland Strello mountain in Portugal (near whose top there
was said to be a lake in which the wrecks of ships floated up to the
surface); and that still more wonderful story of the Arethusa fountain
near Syracuse (whose waters were believed to have come from the Holy
Land by an underground passage); these fabulous narrations are almost
fully equalled by the realities of the whalemen.

Forced into familiarity, then, with such prodigies as these; and
knowing that after repeated, intrepid assaults, the White Whale had
escaped alive; it cannot be much matter of surprise that some whalemen
should go still further in their superstitions; declaring Moby Dick not
only ubiquitous, but immortal (for immortality is but ubiquity in
time); that though groves of spears should be planted in his flanks, he
would still swim away unharmed; or if indeed he should ever be made to
spout thick blood, such a sight would be but a ghastly deception; for
again in unensanguined billows hundreds of leagues away, his unsullied
jet would once more be seen.

But even stripped of these supernatural surmisings, there was enough in
the earthly make and incontestable character of the monster to strike
the imagination with unwonted power. For, it was not so much his
uncommon bulk that so much distinguished him from other sperm whales,
but, as was elsewhere thrown out—a peculiar snow-white wrinkled
forehead, and a high, pyramidical white hump. These were his prominent
features; the tokens whereby, even in the limitless, uncharted seas, he
revealed his identity, at a long distance, to those who knew him.

The rest of his body was so streaked, and spotted, and marbled with the
same shrouded hue, that, in the end, he had gained his distinctive
appellation of the White Whale; a name, indeed, literally justified by
his vivid aspect, when seen gliding at high noon through a dark blue
sea, leaving a milky-way wake of creamy foam, all spangled with golden
gleamings.

Nor was it his unwonted magnitude, nor his remarkable hue, nor yet his
deformed lower jaw, that so much invested the whale with natural
terror, as that unexampled, intelligent malignity which, according to
specific accounts, he had over and over again evinced in his assaults.
More than all, his treacherous retreats struck more of dismay than
perhaps aught else. For, when swimming before his exulting pursuers,
with every apparent symptom of alarm, he had several times been known
to turn round suddenly, and, bearing down upon them, either stave their
boats to splinters, or drive them back in consternation to their ship.

Already several fatalities had attended his chase. But though similar
disasters, however little bruited ashore, were by no means unusual in
the fishery; yet, in most instances, such seemed the White Whale’s
infernal aforethought of ferocity, that every dismembering or death
that he caused, was not wholly regarded as having been inflicted by an
unintelligent agent.

Judge, then, to what pitches of inflamed, distracted fury the minds of
his more desperate hunters were impelled, when amid the chips of chewed
boats, and the sinking limbs of torn comrades, they swam out of the
white curds of the whale’s direful wrath into the serene, exasperating
sunlight, that smiled on, as if at a birth or a bridal.

His three boats stove around him, and oars and men both whirling in the
eddies; one captain, seizing the line-knife from his broken prow, had
dashed at the whale, as an Arkansas duellist at his foe, blindly
seeking with a six inch blade to reach the fathom-deep life of the
whale. That captain was Ahab. And then it was, that suddenly sweeping
his sickle-shaped lower jaw beneath him, Moby Dick had reaped away
Ahab’s leg, as a mower a blade of grass in the field. No turbaned Turk,
no hired Venetian or Malay, could have smote him with more seeming
malice. Small reason was there to doubt, then, that ever since that
almost fatal encounter, Ahab had cherished a wild vindictiveness
against the whale, all the more fell for that in his frantic morbidness
he at last came to identify with him, not only all his bodily woes, but
all his intellectual and spiritual exasperations. The White Whale swam
before him as the monomaniac incarnation of all those malicious
agencies which some deep men feel eating in them, till they are left
living on with half a heart and half a lung. That intangible malignity
which has been from the beginning; to whose dominion even the modern
Christians ascribe one-half of the worlds; which the ancient Ophites of
the east reverenced in their statue devil;—Ahab did not fall down and
worship it like them; but deliriously transferring its idea to the
abhorred white whale, he pitted himself, all mutilated, against it. All
that most maddens and torments; all that stirs up the lees of things;
all truth with malice in it; all that cracks the sinews and cakes the
brain; all the subtle demonisms of life and thought; all evil, to crazy
Ahab, were visibly personified, and made practically assailable in Moby
Dick. He piled upon the whale’s white hump the sum of all the general
rage and hate felt by his whole race from Adam down; and then, as if
his chest had been a mortar, he burst his hot heart’s shell upon it.

It is not probable that this monomania in him took its instant rise at
the precise time of his bodily dismemberment. Then, in darting at the
monster, knife in hand, he had but given loose to a sudden, passionate,
corporal animosity; and when he received the stroke that tore him, he
probably but felt the agonizing bodily laceration, but nothing more.
Yet, when by this collision forced to turn towards home, and for long
months of days and weeks, Ahab and anguish lay stretched together in
one hammock, rounding in mid winter that dreary, howling Patagonian
Cape; then it was, that his torn body and gashed soul bled into one
another; and so interfusing, made him mad. That it was only then, on
the homeward voyage, after the encounter, that the final monomania
seized him, seems all but certain from the fact that, at intervals
during the passage, he was a raving lunatic; and, though unlimbed of a
leg, yet such vital strength yet lurked in his Egyptian chest, and was
moreover intensified by his delirium, that his mates were forced to
lace him fast, even there, as he sailed, raving in his hammock. In a
strait-jacket, he swung to the mad rockings of the gales. And, when
running into more sufferable latitudes, the ship, with mild stun’sails
spread, floated across the tranquil tropics, and, to all appearances,
the old man’s delirium seemed left behind him with the Cape Horn
swells, and he came forth from his dark den into the blessed light and
air; even then, when he bore that firm, collected front, however pale,
and issued his calm orders once again; and his mates thanked God the
direful madness was now gone; even then, Ahab, in his hidden self,
raved on. Human madness is oftentimes a cunning and most feline thing.
When you think it fled, it may have but become transfigured into some
still subtler form. Ahab’s full lunacy subsided not, but deepeningly
contracted; like the unabated Hudson, when that noble Northman flows
narrowly, but unfathomably through the Highland gorge. But, as in his
narrow-flowing monomania, not one jot of Ahab’s broad madness had been
left behind; so in that broad madness, not one jot of his great natural
intellect had perished. That before living agent, now became the living
instrument. If such a furious trope may stand, his special lunacy
stormed his general sanity, and carried it, and turned all its
concentred cannon upon its own mad mark; so that far from having lost
his strength, Ahab, to that one end, did now possess a thousand fold
more potency than ever he had sanely brought to bear upon any one
reasonable object.

This is much; yet Ahab’s larger, darker, deeper part remains unhinted.
But vain to popularize profundities, and all truth is profound. Winding
far down from within the very heart of this spiked Hotel de Cluny where
we here stand—however grand and wonderful, now quit it;—and take your
way, ye nobler, sadder souls, to those vast Roman halls of Thermes;
where far beneath the fantastic towers of man’s upper earth, his root
of grandeur, his whole awful essence sits in bearded state; an antique
buried beneath antiquities, and throned on torsoes! So with a broken
throne, the great gods mock that captive king; so like a Caryatid, he
patient sits, upholding on his frozen brow the piled entablatures of
ages. Wind ye down there, ye prouder, sadder souls! question that
proud, sad king! A family likeness! aye, he did beget ye, ye young
exiled royalties; and from your grim sire only will the old
State-secret come.

Now, in his heart, Ahab had some glimpse of this, namely: all my means
are sane, my motive and my object mad. Yet without power to kill, or
change, or shun the fact; he likewise knew that to mankind he did long
dissemble; in some sort, did still. But that thing of his dissembling
was only subject to his perceptibility, not to his will determinate.
Nevertheless, so well did he succeed in that dissembling, that when
with ivory leg he stepped ashore at last, no Nantucketer thought him
otherwise than but naturally grieved, and that to the quick, with the
terrible casualty which had overtaken him.

The report of his undeniable delirium at sea was likewise popularly
ascribed to a kindred cause. And so too, all the added moodiness which
always afterwards, to the very day of sailing in the Pequod on the
present voyage, sat brooding on his brow. Nor is it so very unlikely,
that far from distrusting his fitness for another whaling voyage, on
account of such dark symptoms, the calculating people of that prudent
isle were inclined to harbor the conceit, that for those very reasons
he was all the better qualified and set on edge, for a pursuit so full
of rage and wildness as the bloody hunt of whales. Gnawed within and
scorched without, with the infixed, unrelenting fangs of some incurable
idea; such an one, could he be found, would seem the very man to dart
his iron and lift his lance against the most appalling of all brutes.
Or, if for any reason thought to be corporeally incapacitated for that,
yet such an one would seem superlatively competent to cheer and howl on
his underlings to the attack. But be all this as it may, certain it is,
that with the mad secret of his unabated rage bolted up and keyed in
him, Ahab had purposely sailed upon the present voyage with the one
only and all-engrossing object of hunting the White Whale. Had any one
of his old acquaintances on shore but half dreamed of what was lurking
in him then, how soon would their aghast and righteous souls have
wrenched the ship from such a fiendish man! They were bent on
profitable cruises, the profit to be counted down in dollars from the
mint. He was intent on an audacious, immitigable, and supernatural
revenge.

Here, then, was this grey-headed, ungodly old man, chasing with curses
a Job’s whale round the world, at the head of a crew, too, chiefly made
up of mongrel renegades, and castaways, and cannibals—morally enfeebled
also, by the incompetence of mere unaided virtue or right-mindedness in
Starbuck, the invulnerable jollity of indifference and recklessness in
Stubb, and the pervading mediocrity in Flask. Such a crew, so
officered, seemed specially picked and packed by some infernal fatality
to help him to his monomaniac revenge. How it was that they so
aboundingly responded to the old man’s ire—by what evil magic their
souls were possessed, that at times his hate seemed almost theirs; the
White Whale as much their insufferable foe as his; how all this came to
be—what the White Whale was to them, or how to their unconscious
understandings, also, in some dim, unsuspected way, he might have
seemed the gliding great demon of the seas of life,—all this to
explain, would be to dive deeper than Ishmael can go. The subterranean
miner that works in us all, how can one tell whither leads his shaft by
the ever shifting, muffled sound of his pick? Who does not feel the
irresistible arm drag? What skiff in tow of a seventy-four can stand
still? For one, I gave myself up to the abandonment of the time and the
place; but while yet all a-rush to encounter the whale, could see
naught in that brute but the deadliest ill.


CHAPTER 42. The Whiteness of the Whale.

What the white whale was to Ahab, has been hinted; what, at times, he
was to me, as yet remains unsaid.

Aside from those more obvious considerations touching Moby Dick, which
could not but occasionally awaken in any man’s soul some alarm, there
was another thought, or rather vague, nameless horror concerning him,
which at times by its intensity completely overpowered all the rest;
and yet so mystical and well nigh ineffable was it, that I almost
despair of putting it in a comprehensible form. It was the whiteness of
the whale that above all things appalled me. But how can I hope to
explain myself here; and yet, in some dim, random way, explain myself I
must, else all these chapters might be naught.

Though in many natural objects, whiteness refiningly enhances beauty,
as if imparting some special virtue of its own, as in marbles,
japonicas, and pearls; and though various nations have in some way
recognised a certain royal preeminence in this hue; even the barbaric,
grand old kings of Pegu placing the title “Lord of the White Elephants”
above all their other magniloquent ascriptions of dominion; and the
modern kings of Siam unfurling the same snow-white quadruped in the
royal standard; and the Hanoverian flag bearing the one figure of a
snow-white charger; and the great Austrian Empire, Cæsarian, heir to
overlording Rome, having for the imperial colour the same imperial hue;
and though this pre-eminence in it applies to the human race itself,
giving the white man ideal mastership over every dusky tribe; and
though, besides, all this, whiteness has been even made significant of
gladness, for among the Romans a white stone marked a joyful day; and
though in other mortal sympathies and symbolizings, this same hue is
made the emblem of many touching, noble things—the innocence of brides,
the benignity of age; though among the Red Men of America the giving of
the white belt of wampum was the deepest pledge of honor; though in
many climes, whiteness typifies the majesty of Justice in the ermine of
the Judge, and contributes to the daily state of kings and queens drawn
by milk-white steeds; though even in the higher mysteries of the most
august religions it has been made the symbol of the divine spotlessness
and power; by the Persian fire worshippers, the white forked flame
being held the holiest on the altar; and in the Greek mythologies,
Great Jove himself being made incarnate in a snow-white bull; and
though to the noble Iroquois, the midwinter sacrifice of the sacred
White Dog was by far the holiest festival of their theology, that
spotless, faithful creature being held the purest envoy they could send
to the Great Spirit with the annual tidings of their own fidelity; and
though directly from the Latin word for white, all Christian priests
derive the name of one part of their sacred vesture, the alb or tunic,
worn beneath the cassock; and though among the holy pomps of the Romish
faith, white is specially employed in the celebration of the Passion of
our Lord; though in the Vision of St. John, white robes are given to
the redeemed, and the four-and-twenty elders stand clothed in white
before the great white throne, and the Holy One that sitteth there
white like wool; yet for all these accumulated associations, with
whatever is sweet, and honorable, and sublime, there yet lurks an
elusive something in the innermost idea of this hue, which strikes more
of panic to the soul than that redness which affrights in blood.

This elusive quality it is, which causes the thought of whiteness, when
divorced from more kindly associations, and coupled with any object
terrible in itself, to heighten that terror to the furthest bounds.
Witness the white bear of the poles, and the white shark of the
tropics; what but their smooth, flaky whiteness makes them the
transcendent horrors they are? That ghastly whiteness it is which
imparts such an abhorrent mildness, even more loathsome than terrific,
to the dumb gloating of their aspect. So that not the fierce-fanged
tiger in his heraldic coat can so stagger courage as the white-shrouded
bear or shark.*

*With reference to the Polar bear, it may possibly be urged by him who
would fain go still deeper into this matter, that it is not the
whiteness, separately regarded, which heightens the intolerable
hideousness of that brute; for, analysed, that heightened hideousness,
it might be said, only rises from the circumstance, that the
irresponsible ferociousness of the creature stands invested in the
fleece of celestial innocence and love; and hence, by bringing together
two such opposite emotions in our minds, the Polar bear frightens us
with so unnatural a contrast. But even assuming all this to be true;
yet, were it not for the whiteness, you would not have that intensified
terror.

As for the white shark, the white gliding ghostliness of repose in that
creature, when beheld in his ordinary moods, strangely tallies with the
same quality in the Polar quadruped. This peculiarity is most vividly
hit by the French in the name they bestow upon that fish. The Romish
mass for the dead begins with “Requiem eternam” (eternal rest), whence
_Requiem_ denominating the mass itself, and any other funeral music.
Now, in allusion to the white, silent stillness of death in this shark,
and the mild deadliness of his habits, the French call him _Requin_.

Bethink thee of the albatross, whence come those clouds of spiritual
wonderment and pale dread, in which that white phantom sails in all
imaginations? Not Coleridge first threw that spell; but God’s great,
unflattering laureate, Nature.*

*I remember the first albatross I ever saw. It was during a prolonged
gale, in waters hard upon the Antarctic seas. From my forenoon watch
below, I ascended to the overclouded deck; and there, dashed upon the
main hatches, I saw a regal, feathery thing of unspotted whiteness, and
with a hooked, Roman bill sublime. At intervals, it arched forth its
vast archangel wings, as if to embrace some holy ark. Wondrous
flutterings and throbbings shook it. Though bodily unharmed, it uttered
cries, as some king’s ghost in supernatural distress. Through its
inexpressible, strange eyes, methought I peeped to secrets which took
hold of God. As Abraham before the angels, I bowed myself; the white
thing was so white, its wings so wide, and in those for ever exiled
waters, I had lost the miserable warping memories of traditions and of
towns. Long I gazed at that prodigy of plumage. I cannot tell, can only
hint, the things that darted through me then. But at last I awoke; and
turning, asked a sailor what bird was this. A goney, he replied. Goney!
never had heard that name before; is it conceivable that this glorious
thing is utterly unknown to men ashore! never! But some time after, I
learned that goney was some seaman’s name for albatross. So that by no
possibility could Coleridge’s wild Rhyme have had aught to do with
those mystical impressions which were mine, when I saw that bird upon
our deck. For neither had I then read the Rhyme, nor knew the bird to
be an albatross. Yet, in saying this, I do but indirectly burnish a
little brighter the noble merit of the poem and the poet.

I assert, then, that in the wondrous bodily whiteness of the bird
chiefly lurks the secret of the spell; a truth the more evinced in
this, that by a solecism of terms there are birds called grey
albatrosses; and these I have frequently seen, but never with such
emotions as when I beheld the Antarctic fowl.

But how had the mystic thing been caught? Whisper it not, and I will
tell; with a treacherous hook and line, as the fowl floated on the sea.
At last the Captain made a postman of it; tying a lettered, leathern
tally round its neck, with the ship’s time and place; and then letting
it escape. But I doubt not, that leathern tally, meant for man, was
taken off in Heaven, when the white fowl flew to join the wing-folding,
the invoking, and adoring cherubim!

Most famous in our Western annals and Indian traditions is that of the
White Steed of the Prairies; a magnificent milk-white charger,
large-eyed, small-headed, bluff-chested, and with the dignity of a
thousand monarchs in his lofty, overscorning carriage. He was the
elected Xerxes of vast herds of wild horses, whose pastures in those
days were only fenced by the Rocky Mountains and the Alleghanies. At
their flaming head he westward trooped it like that chosen star which
every evening leads on the hosts of light. The flashing cascade of his
mane, the curving comet of his tail, invested him with housings more
resplendent than gold and silver-beaters could have furnished him. A
most imperial and archangelical apparition of that unfallen, western
world, which to the eyes of the old trappers and hunters revived the
glories of those primeval times when Adam walked majestic as a god,
bluff-browed and fearless as this mighty steed. Whether marching amid
his aides and marshals in the van of countless cohorts that endlessly
streamed it over the plains, like an Ohio; or whether with his
circumambient subjects browsing all around at the horizon, the White
Steed gallopingly reviewed them with warm nostrils reddening through
his cool milkiness; in whatever aspect he presented himself, always to
the bravest Indians he was the object of trembling reverence and awe.
Nor can it be questioned from what stands on legendary record of this
noble horse, that it was his spiritual whiteness chiefly, which so
clothed him with divineness; and that this divineness had that in it
which, though commanding worship, at the same time enforced a certain
nameless terror.

But there are other instances where this whiteness loses all that
accessory and strange glory which invests it in the White Steed and
Albatross.

What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and often shocks
the eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith and kin! It is
that whiteness which invests him, a thing expressed by the name he
bears. The Albino is as well made as other men—has no substantive
deformity—and yet this mere aspect of all-pervading whiteness makes him
more strangely hideous than the ugliest abortion. Why should this be
so?

Nor, in quite other aspects, does Nature in her least palpable but not
the less malicious agencies, fail to enlist among her forces this
crowning attribute of the terrible. From its snowy aspect, the
gauntleted ghost of the Southern Seas has been denominated the White
Squall. Nor, in some historic instances, has the art of human malice
omitted so potent an auxiliary. How wildly it heightens the effect of
that passage in Froissart, when, masked in the snowy symbol of their
faction, the desperate White Hoods of Ghent murder their bailiff in the
market-place!

Nor, in some things, does the common, hereditary experience of all
mankind fail to bear witness to the supernaturalism of this hue. It
cannot well be doubted, that the one visible quality in the aspect of
the dead which most appals the gazer, is the marble pallor lingering
there; as if indeed that pallor were as much like the badge of
consternation in the other world, as of mortal trepidation here. And
from that pallor of the dead, we borrow the expressive hue of the
shroud in which we wrap them. Nor even in our superstitions do we fail
to throw the same snowy mantle round our phantoms; all ghosts rising in
a milk-white fog—Yea, while these terrors seize us, let us add, that
even the king of terrors, when personified by the evangelist, rides on
his pallid horse.

Therefore, in his other moods, symbolize whatever grand or gracious
thing he will by whiteness, no man can deny that in its profoundest
idealized significance it calls up a peculiar apparition to the soul.

But though without dissent this point be fixed, how is mortal man to
account for it? To analyse it, would seem impossible. Can we, then, by
the citation of some of those instances wherein this thing of
whiteness—though for the time either wholly or in great part stripped
of all direct associations calculated to impart to it aught fearful,
but nevertheless, is found to exert over us the same sorcery, however
modified;—can we thus hope to light upon some chance clue to conduct us
to the hidden cause we seek?

Let us try. But in a matter like this, subtlety appeals to subtlety,
and without imagination no man can follow another into these halls. And
though, doubtless, some at least of the imaginative impressions about
to be presented may have been shared by most men, yet few perhaps were
entirely conscious of them at the time, and therefore may not be able
to recall them now.

Why to the man of untutored ideality, who happens to be but loosely
acquainted with the peculiar character of the day, does the bare
mention of Whitsuntide marshal in the fancy such long, dreary,
speechless processions of slow-pacing pilgrims, down-cast and hooded
with new-fallen snow? Or, to the unread, unsophisticated Protestant of
the Middle American States, why does the passing mention of a White
Friar or a White Nun, evoke such an eyeless statue in the soul?

Or what is there apart from the traditions of dungeoned warriors and
kings (which will not wholly account for it) that makes the White Tower
of London tell so much more strongly on the imagination of an
untravelled American, than those other storied structures, its
neighbors—the Byward Tower, or even the Bloody? And those sublimer
towers, the White Mountains of New Hampshire, whence, in peculiar
moods, comes that gigantic ghostliness over the soul at the bare
mention of that name, while the thought of Virginia’s Blue Ridge is
full of a soft, dewy, distant dreaminess? Or why, irrespective of all
latitudes and longitudes, does the name of the White Sea exert such a
spectralness over the fancy, while that of the Yellow Sea lulls us with
mortal thoughts of long lacquered mild afternoons on the waves,
followed by the gaudiest and yet sleepiest of sunsets? Or, to choose a
wholly unsubstantial instance, purely addressed to the fancy, why, in
reading the old fairy tales of Central Europe, does “the tall pale man”
of the Hartz forests, whose changeless pallor unrustlingly glides
through the green of the groves—why is this phantom more terrible than
all the whooping imps of the Blocksburg?

Nor is it, altogether, the remembrance of her cathedral-toppling
earthquakes; nor the stampedoes of her frantic seas; nor the
tearlessness of arid skies that never rain; nor the sight of her wide
field of leaning spires, wrenched cope-stones, and crosses all adroop
(like canted yards of anchored fleets); and her suburban avenues of
house-walls lying over upon each other, as a tossed pack of cards;—it
is not these things alone which make tearless Lima, the strangest,
saddest city thou can’st see. For Lima has taken the white veil; and
there is a higher horror in this whiteness of her woe. Old as Pizarro,
this whiteness keeps her ruins for ever new; admits not the cheerful
greenness of complete decay; spreads over her broken ramparts the rigid
pallor of an apoplexy that fixes its own distortions.

I know that, to the common apprehension, this phenomenon of whiteness
is not confessed to be the prime agent in exaggerating the terror of
objects otherwise terrible; nor to the unimaginative mind is there
aught of terror in those appearances whose awfulness to another mind
almost solely consists in this one phenomenon, especially when
exhibited under any form at all approaching to muteness or
universality. What I mean by these two statements may perhaps be
respectively elucidated by the following examples.

First: The mariner, when drawing nigh the coasts of foreign lands, if
by night he hear the roar of breakers, starts to vigilance, and feels
just enough of trepidation to sharpen all his faculties; but under
precisely similar circumstances, let him be called from his hammock to
view his ship sailing through a midnight sea of milky whiteness—as if
from encircling headlands shoals of combed white bears were swimming
round him, then he feels a silent, superstitious dread; the shrouded
phantom of the whitened waters is horrible to him as a real ghost; in
vain the lead assures him he is still off soundings; heart and helm
they both go down; he never rests till blue water is under him again.
Yet where is the mariner who will tell thee, “Sir, it was not so much
the fear of striking hidden rocks, as the fear of that hideous
whiteness that so stirred me?”

Second: To the native Indian of Peru, the continual sight of the
snow-howdahed Andes conveys naught of dread, except, perhaps, in the
mere fancying of the eternal frosted desolateness reigning at such vast
altitudes, and the natural conceit of what a fearfulness it would be to
lose oneself in such inhuman solitudes. Much the same is it with the
backwoodsman of the West, who with comparative indifference views an
unbounded prairie sheeted with driven snow, no shadow of tree or twig
to break the fixed trance of whiteness. Not so the sailor, beholding
the scenery of the Antarctic seas; where at times, by some infernal
trick of legerdemain in the powers of frost and air, he, shivering and
half shipwrecked, instead of rainbows speaking hope and solace to his
misery, views what seems a boundless churchyard grinning upon him with
its lean ice monuments and splintered crosses.

But thou sayest, methinks that white-lead chapter about whiteness is
but a white flag hung out from a craven soul; thou surrenderest to a
hypo, Ishmael.

Tell me, why this strong young colt, foaled in some peaceful valley of
Vermont, far removed from all beasts of prey—why is it that upon the
sunniest day, if you but shake a fresh buffalo robe behind him, so that
he cannot even see it, but only smells its wild animal muskiness—why
will he start, snort, and with bursting eyes paw the ground in
phrensies of affright? There is no remembrance in him of any gorings of
wild creatures in his green northern home, so that the strange
muskiness he smells cannot recall to him anything associated with the
experience of former perils; for what knows he, this New England colt,
of the black bisons of distant Oregon?

No: but here thou beholdest even in a dumb brute, the instinct of the
knowledge of the demonism in the world. Though thousands of miles from
Oregon, still when he smells that savage musk, the rending, goring
bison herds are as present as to the deserted wild foal of the
prairies, which this instant they may be trampling into dust.

Thus, then, the muffled rollings of a milky sea; the bleak rustlings of
the festooned frosts of mountains; the desolate shiftings of the
windrowed snows of prairies; all these, to Ishmael, are as the shaking
of that buffalo robe to the frightened colt!

Though neither knows where lie the nameless things of which the mystic
sign gives forth such hints; yet with me, as with the colt, somewhere
those things must exist. Though in many of its aspects this visible
world seems formed in love, the invisible spheres were formed in
fright.

But not yet have we solved the incantation of this whiteness, and
learned why it appeals with such power to the soul; and more strange
and far more portentous—why, as we have seen, it is at once the most
meaning symbol of spiritual things, nay, the very veil of the
Christian’s Deity; and yet should be as it is, the intensifying agent
in things the most appalling to mankind.

Is it that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the heartless voids
and immensities of the universe, and thus stabs us from behind with the
thought of annihilation, when beholding the white depths of the milky
way? Or is it, that as in essence whiteness is not so much a colour as
the visible absence of colour; and at the same time the concrete of all
colours; is it for these reasons that there is such a dumb blankness,
full of meaning, in a wide landscape of snows—a colourless, all-colour
of atheism from which we shrink? And when we consider that other theory
of the natural philosophers, that all other earthly hues—every stately
or lovely emblazoning—the sweet tinges of sunset skies and woods; yea,
and the gilded velvets of butterflies, and the butterfly cheeks of
young girls; all these are but subtile deceits, not actually inherent
in substances, but only laid on from without; so that all deified
Nature absolutely paints like the harlot, whose allurements cover
nothing but the charnel-house within; and when we proceed further, and
consider that the mystical cosmetic which produces every one of her
hues, the great principle of light, for ever remains white or colorless
in itself, and if operating without medium upon matter, would touch all
objects, even tulips and roses, with its own blank tinge—pondering all
this, the palsied universe lies before us a leper; and like wilful
travellers in Lapland, who refuse to wear coloured and colouring
glasses upon their eyes, so the wretched infidel gazes himself blind at
the monumental white shroud that wraps all the prospect around him. And
of all these things the Albino whale was the symbol. Wonder ye then at
the fiery hunt?


CHAPTER 43. Hark!

“HIST! Did you hear that noise, Cabaco?”

It was the middle-watch: a fair moonlight; the seamen were standing in
a cordon, extending from one of the fresh-water butts in the waist, to
the scuttle-butt near the taffrail. In this manner, they passed the
buckets to fill the scuttle-butt. Standing, for the most part, on the
hallowed precincts of the quarter-deck, they were careful not to speak
or rustle their feet. From hand to hand, the buckets went in the
deepest silence, only broken by the occasional flap of a sail, and the
steady hum of the unceasingly advancing keel.

It was in the midst of this repose, that Archy, one of the cordon,
whose post was near the after-hatches, whispered to his neighbor, a
Cholo, the words above.

“Hist! did you hear that noise, Cabaco?”

“Take the bucket, will ye, Archy? what noise d’ye mean?”

“There it is again—under the hatches—don’t you hear it—a cough—it
sounded like a cough.”

“Cough be damned! Pass along that return bucket.”

“There again—there it is!—it sounds like two or three sleepers turning
over, now!”

“Caramba! have done, shipmate, will ye? It’s the three soaked biscuits
ye eat for supper turning over inside of ye—nothing else. Look to the
bucket!”

“Say what ye will, shipmate; I’ve sharp ears.”

“Aye, you are the chap, ain’t ye, that heard the hum of the old
Quakeress’s knitting-needles fifty miles at sea from Nantucket; you’re
the chap.”

“Grin away; we’ll see what turns up. Hark ye, Cabaco, there is somebody
down in the after-hold that has not yet been seen on deck; and I
suspect our old Mogul knows something of it too. I heard Stubb tell
Flask, one morning watch, that there was something of that sort in the
wind.”

“Tish! the bucket!”


CHAPTER 44. The Chart.

Had you followed Captain Ahab down into his cabin after the squall that
took place on the night succeeding that wild ratification of his
purpose with his crew, you would have seen him go to a locker in the
transom, and bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish sea
charts, spread them before him on his screwed-down table. Then seating
himself before it, you would have seen him intently study the various
lines and shadings which there met his eye; and with slow but steady
pencil trace additional courses over spaces that before were blank. At
intervals, he would refer to piles of old log-books beside him, wherein
were set down the seasons and places in which, on various former
voyages of various ships, sperm whales had been captured or seen.

While thus employed, the heavy pewter lamp suspended in chains over his
head, continually rocked with the motion of the ship, and for ever
threw shifting gleams and shadows of lines upon his wrinkled brow, till
it almost seemed that while he himself was marking out lines and
courses on the wrinkled charts, some invisible pencil was also tracing
lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of his forehead.

But it was not this night in particular that, in the solitude of his
cabin, Ahab thus pondered over his charts. Almost every night they were
brought out; almost every night some pencil marks were effaced, and
others were substituted. For with the charts of all four oceans before
him, Ahab was threading a maze of currents and eddies, with a view to
the more certain accomplishment of that monomaniac thought of his soul.

Now, to any one not fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans,
it might seem an absurdly hopeless task thus to seek out one solitary
creature in the unhooped oceans of this planet. But not so did it seem
to Ahab, who knew the sets of all tides and currents; and thereby
calculating the driftings of the sperm whale’s food; and, also, calling
to mind the regular, ascertained seasons for hunting him in particular
latitudes; could arrive at reasonable surmises, almost approaching to
certainties, concerning the timeliest day to be upon this or that
ground in search of his prey.

So assured, indeed, is the fact concerning the periodicalness of the
sperm whale’s resorting to given waters, that many hunters believe
that, could he be closely observed and studied throughout the world;
were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale fleet carefully
collated, then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found to
correspond in invariability to those of the herring-shoals or the
flights of swallows. On this hint, attempts have been made to construct
elaborate migratory charts of the sperm whale.*


  *Since the above was written, the statement is happily borne out by
  an official circular, issued by Lieutenant Maury, of the National
  Observatory, Washington, April 16th, 1851. By that circular, it
  appears that precisely such a chart is in course of completion; and
  portions of it are presented in the circular. “This chart divides the
  ocean into districts of five degrees of latitude by five degrees of
  longitude; perpendicularly through each of which districts are twelve
  columns for the twelve months; and horizontally through each of which
  districts are three lines; one to show the number of days that have
  been spent in each month in every district, and the two others to
  show the number of days in which whales, sperm or right, have been
  seen.”




Besides, when making a passage from one feeding-ground to another, the
sperm whales, guided by some infallible instinct—say, rather, secret
intelligence from the Deity—mostly swim in _veins_, as they are called;
continuing their way along a given ocean-line with such undeviating
exactitude, that no ship ever sailed her course, by any chart, with one
tithe of such marvellous precision. Though, in these cases, the
direction taken by any one whale be straight as a surveyor’s parallel,
and though the line of advance be strictly confined to its own
unavoidable, straight wake, yet the arbitrary _vein_ in which at these
times he is said to swim, generally embraces some few miles in width
(more or less, as the vein is presumed to expand or contract); but
never exceeds the visual sweep from the whale-ship’s mast-heads, when
circumspectly gliding along this magic zone. The sum is, that at
particular seasons within that breadth and along that path, migrating
whales may with great confidence be looked for.

And hence not only at substantiated times, upon well known separate
feeding-grounds, could Ahab hope to encounter his prey; but in crossing
the widest expanses of water between those grounds he could, by his
art, so place and time himself on his way, as even then not to be
wholly without prospect of a meeting.

There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to entangle his
delirious but still methodical scheme. But not so in the reality,
perhaps. Though the gregarious sperm whales have their regular seasons
for particular grounds, yet in general you cannot conclude that the
herds which haunted such and such a latitude or longitude this year,
say, will turn out to be identically the same with those that were
found there the preceding season; though there are peculiar and
unquestionable instances where the contrary of this has proved true. In
general, the same remark, only within a less wide limit, applies to the
solitaries and hermits among the matured, aged sperm whales. So that
though Moby Dick had in a former year been seen, for example, on what
is called the Seychelle ground in the Indian ocean, or Volcano Bay on
the Japanese Coast; yet it did not follow, that were the Pequod to
visit either of those spots at any subsequent corresponding season, she
would infallibly encounter him there. So, too, with some other feeding
grounds, where he had at times revealed himself. But all these seemed
only his casual stopping-places and ocean-inns, so to speak, not his
places of prolonged abode. And where Ahab’s chances of accomplishing
his object have hitherto been spoken of, allusion has only been made to
whatever way-side, antecedent, extra prospects were his, ere a
particular set time or place were attained, when all possibilities
would become probabilities, and, as Ahab fondly thought, every
possibility the next thing to a certainty. That particular set time and
place were conjoined in the one technical phrase—the
Season-on-the-Line. For there and then, for several consecutive years,
Moby Dick had been periodically descried, lingering in those waters for
awhile, as the sun, in its annual round, loiters for a predicted
interval in any one sign of the Zodiac. There it was, too, that most of
the deadly encounters with the white whale had taken place; there the
waves were storied with his deeds; there also was that tragic spot
where the monomaniac old man had found the awful motive to his
vengeance. But in the cautious comprehensiveness and unloitering
vigilance with which Ahab threw his brooding soul into this unfaltering
hunt, he would not permit himself to rest all his hopes upon the one
crowning fact above mentioned, however flattering it might be to those
hopes; nor in the sleeplessness of his vow could he so tranquillize his
unquiet heart as to postpone all intervening quest.

Now, the Pequod had sailed from Nantucket at the very beginning of the
Season-on-the-Line. No possible endeavor then could enable her
commander to make the great passage southwards, double Cape Horn, and
then running down sixty degrees of latitude arrive in the equatorial
Pacific in time to cruise there. Therefore, he must wait for the next
ensuing season. Yet the premature hour of the Pequod’s sailing had,
perhaps, been correctly selected by Ahab, with a view to this very
complexion of things. Because, an interval of three hundred and
sixty-five days and nights was before him; an interval which, instead
of impatiently enduring ashore, he would spend in a miscellaneous hunt;
if by chance the White Whale, spending his vacation in seas far remote
from his periodical feeding-grounds, should turn up his wrinkled brow
off the Persian Gulf, or in the Bengal Bay, or China Seas, or in any
other waters haunted by his race. So that Monsoons, Pampas,
Nor’-Westers, Harmattans, Trades; any wind but the Levanter and Simoon,
might blow Moby Dick into the devious zig-zag world-circle of the
Pequod’s circumnavigating wake.

But granting all this; yet, regarded discreetly and coolly, seems it
not but a mad idea, this; that in the broad boundless ocean, one
solitary whale, even if encountered, should be thought capable of
individual recognition from his hunter, even as a white-bearded Mufti
in the thronged thoroughfares of Constantinople? Yes. For the peculiar
snow-white brow of Moby Dick, and his snow-white hump, could not but be
unmistakable. And have I not tallied the whale, Ahab would mutter to
himself, as after poring over his charts till long after midnight he
would throw himself back in reveries—tallied him, and shall he escape?
His broad fins are bored, and scalloped out like a lost sheep’s ear!
And here, his mad mind would run on in a breathless race; till a
weariness and faintness of pondering came over him; and in the open air
of the deck he would seek to recover his strength. Ah, God! what
trances of torments does that man endure who is consumed with one
unachieved revengeful desire. He sleeps with clenched hands; and wakes
with his own bloody nails in his palms.

Often, when forced from his hammock by exhausting and intolerably vivid
dreams of the night, which, resuming his own intense thoughts through
the day, carried them on amid a clashing of phrensies, and whirled them
round and round and round in his blazing brain, till the very throbbing
of his life-spot became insufferable anguish; and when, as was
sometimes the case, these spiritual throes in him heaved his being up
from its base, and a chasm seemed opening in him, from which forked
flames and lightnings shot up, and accursed fiends beckoned him to leap
down among them; when this hell in himself yawned beneath him, a wild
cry would be heard through the ship; and with glaring eyes Ahab would
burst from his state room, as though escaping from a bed that was on
fire. Yet these, perhaps, instead of being the unsuppressable symptoms
of some latent weakness, or fright at his own resolve, were but the
plainest tokens of its intensity. For, at such times, crazy Ahab, the
scheming, unappeasedly steadfast hunter of the white whale; this Ahab
that had gone to his hammock, was not the agent that so caused him to
burst from it in horror again. The latter was the eternal, living
principle or soul in him; and in sleep, being for the time dissociated
from the characterizing mind, which at other times employed it for its
outer vehicle or agent, it spontaneously sought escape from the
scorching contiguity of the frantic thing, of which, for the time, it
was no longer an integral. But as the mind does not exist unless
leagued with the soul, therefore it must have been that, in Ahab’s
case, yielding up all his thoughts and fancies to his one supreme
purpose; that purpose, by its own sheer inveteracy of will, forced
itself against gods and devils into a kind of self-assumed, independent
being of its own. Nay, could grimly live and burn, while the common
vitality to which it was conjoined, fled horror-stricken from the
unbidden and unfathered birth. Therefore, the tormented spirit that
glared out of bodily eyes, when what seemed Ahab rushed from his room,
was for the time but a vacated thing, a formless somnambulistic being,
a ray of living light, to be sure, but without an object to colour, and
therefore a blankness in itself. God help thee, old man, thy thoughts
have created a creature in thee; and he whose intense thinking thus
makes him a Prometheus; a vulture feeds upon that heart for ever; that
vulture the very creature he creates.


CHAPTER 45. The Affidavit.

So far as what there may be of a narrative in this book; and, indeed,
as indirectly touching one or two very interesting and curious
particulars in the habits of sperm whales, the foregoing chapter, in
its earlier part, is as important a one as will be found in this
volume; but the leading matter of it requires to be still further and
more familiarly enlarged upon, in order to be adequately understood,
and moreover to take away any incredulity which a profound ignorance of
the entire subject may induce in some minds, as to the natural verity
of the main points of this affair.

I care not to perform this part of my task methodically; but shall be
content to produce the desired impression by separate citations of
items, practically or reliably known to me as a whaleman; and from
these citations, I take it—the conclusion aimed at will naturally
follow of itself.

First: I have personally known three instances where a whale, after
receiving a harpoon, has effected a complete escape; and, after an
interval (in one instance of three years), has been again struck by the
same hand, and slain; when the two irons, both marked by the same
private cypher, have been taken from the body. In the instance where
three years intervened between the flinging of the two harpoons; and I
think it may have been something more than that; the man who darted
them happening, in the interval, to go in a trading ship on a voyage to
Africa, went ashore there, joined a discovery party, and penetrated far
into the interior, where he travelled for a period of nearly two years,
often endangered by serpents, savages, tigers, poisonous miasmas, with
all the other common perils incident to wandering in the heart of
unknown regions. Meanwhile, the whale he had struck must also have been
on its travels; no doubt it had thrice circumnavigated the globe,
brushing with its flanks all the coasts of Africa; but to no purpose.
This man and this whale again came together, and the one vanquished the
other. I say I, myself, have known three instances similar to this;
that is in two of them I saw the whales struck; and, upon the second
attack, saw the two irons with the respective marks cut in them,
afterwards taken from the dead fish. In the three-year instance, it so
fell out that I was in the boat both times, first and last, and the
last time distinctly recognised a peculiar sort of huge mole under the
whale’s eye, which I had observed there three years previous. I say
three years, but I am pretty sure it was more than that. Here are three
instances, then, which I personally know the truth of; but I have heard
of many other instances from persons whose veracity in the matter there
is no good ground to impeach.

Secondly: It is well known in the Sperm Whale Fishery, however ignorant
the world ashore may be of it, that there have been several memorable
historical instances where a particular whale in the ocean has been at
distant times and places popularly cognisable. Why such a whale became
thus marked was not altogether and originally owing to his bodily
peculiarities as distinguished from other whales; for however peculiar
in that respect any chance whale may be, they soon put an end to his
peculiarities by killing him, and boiling him down into a peculiarly
valuable oil. No: the reason was this: that from the fatal experiences
of the fishery there hung a terrible prestige of perilousness about
such a whale as there did about Rinaldo Rinaldini, insomuch that most
fishermen were content to recognise him by merely touching their
tarpaulins when he would be discovered lounging by them on the sea,
without seeking to cultivate a more intimate acquaintance. Like some
poor devils ashore that happen to know an irascible great man, they
make distant unobtrusive salutations to him in the street, lest if they
pursued the acquaintance further, they might receive a summary thump
for their presumption.

But not only did each of these famous whales enjoy great individual
celebrity—Nay, you may call it an ocean-wide renown; not only was he
famous in life and now is immortal in forecastle stories after death,
but he was admitted into all the rights, privileges, and distinctions
of a name; had as much a name indeed as Cambyses or Cæsar. Was it not
so, O Timor Tom! thou famed leviathan, scarred like an iceberg, who so
long did’st lurk in the Oriental straits of that name, whose spout was
oft seen from the palmy beach of Ombay? Was it not so, O New Zealand
Jack! thou terror of all cruisers that crossed their wakes in the
vicinity of the Tattoo Land? Was it not so, O Morquan! King of Japan,
whose lofty jet they say at times assumed the semblance of a snow-white
cross against the sky? Was it not so, O Don Miguel! thou Chilian whale,
marked like an old tortoise with mystic hieroglyphics upon the back! In
plain prose, here are four whales as well known to the students of
Cetacean History as Marius or Sylla to the classic scholar.

But this is not all. New Zealand Tom and Don Miguel, after at various
times creating great havoc among the boats of different vessels, were
finally gone in quest of, systematically hunted out, chased and killed
by valiant whaling captains, who heaved up their anchors with that
express object as much in view, as in setting out through the
Narragansett Woods, Captain Butler of old had it in his mind to capture
that notorious murderous savage Annawon, the headmost warrior of the
Indian King Philip.

I do not know where I can find a better place than just here, to make
mention of one or two other things, which to me seem important, as in
printed form establishing in all respects the reasonableness of the
whole story of the White Whale, more especially the catastrophe. For
this is one of those disheartening instances where truth requires full
as much bolstering as error. So ignorant are most landsmen of some of
the plainest and most palpable wonders of the world, that without some
hints touching the plain facts, historical and otherwise, of the
fishery, they might scout at Moby Dick as a monstrous fable, or still
worse and more detestable, a hideous and intolerable allegory.

First: Though most men have some vague flitting ideas of the general
perils of the grand fishery, yet they have nothing like a fixed, vivid
conception of those perils, and the frequency with which they recur.
One reason perhaps is, that not one in fifty of the actual disasters
and deaths by casualties in the fishery, ever finds a public record at
home, however transient and immediately forgotten that record. Do you
suppose that that poor fellow there, who this moment perhaps caught by
the whale-line off the coast of New Guinea, is being carried down to
the bottom of the sea by the sounding leviathan—do you suppose that
that poor fellow’s name will appear in the newspaper obituary you will
read to-morrow at your breakfast? No: because the mails are very
irregular between here and New Guinea. In fact, did you ever hear what
might be called regular news direct or indirect from New Guinea? Yet I
tell you that upon one particular voyage which I made to the Pacific,
among many others we spoke thirty different ships, every one of which
had had a death by a whale, some of them more than one, and three that
had each lost a boat’s crew. For God’s sake, be economical with your
lamps and candles! not a gallon you burn, but at least one drop of
man’s blood was spilled for it.

Secondly: People ashore have indeed some indefinite idea that a whale
is an enormous creature of enormous power; but I have ever found that
when narrating to them some specific example of this two-fold
enormousness, they have significantly complimented me upon my
facetiousness; when, I declare upon my soul, I had no more idea of
being facetious than Moses, when he wrote the history of the plagues of
Egypt.

But fortunately the special point I here seek can be established upon
testimony entirely independent of my own. That point is this: The Sperm
Whale is in some cases sufficiently powerful, knowing, and judiciously
malicious, as with direct aforethought to stave in, utterly destroy,
and sink a large ship; and what is more, the Sperm Whale _has_ done it.

First: In the year 1820 the ship Essex, Captain Pollard, of Nantucket,
was cruising in the Pacific Ocean. One day she saw spouts, lowered her
boats, and gave chase to a shoal of sperm whales. Ere long, several of
the whales were wounded; when, suddenly, a very large whale escaping
from the boats, issued from the shoal, and bore directly down upon the
ship. Dashing his forehead against her hull, he so stove her in, that
in less than “ten minutes” she settled down and fell over. Not a
surviving plank of her has been seen since. After the severest
exposure, part of the crew reached the land in their boats. Being
returned home at last, Captain Pollard once more sailed for the Pacific
in command of another ship, but the gods shipwrecked him again upon
unknown rocks and breakers; for the second time his ship was utterly
lost, and forthwith forswearing the sea, he has never tempted it since.
At this day Captain Pollard is a resident of Nantucket. I have seen
Owen Chace, who was chief mate of the Essex at the time of the tragedy;
I have read his plain and faithful narrative; I have conversed with his
son; and all this within a few miles of the scene of the catastrophe.*

*The following are extracts from Chace’s narrative: “Every fact seemed
to warrant me in concluding that it was anything but chance which
directed his operations; he made two several attacks upon the ship, at
a short interval between them, both of which, according to their
direction, were calculated to do us the most injury, by being made
ahead, and thereby combining the speed of the two objects for the
shock; to effect which, the exact manœuvres which he made were
necessary. His aspect was most horrible, and such as indicated
resentment and fury. He came directly from the shoal which we had just
before entered, and in which we had struck three of his companions, as
if fired with revenge for their sufferings.” Again: “At all events, the
whole circumstances taken together, all happening before my own eyes,
and producing, at the time, impressions in my mind of decided,
calculating mischief, on the part of the whale (many of which
impressions I cannot now recall), induce me to be satisfied that I am
correct in my opinion.”

Here are his reflections some time after quitting the ship, during a
black night in an open boat, when almost despairing of reaching any
hospitable shore. “The dark ocean and swelling waters were nothing; the
fears of being swallowed up by some dreadful tempest, or dashed upon
hidden rocks, with all the other ordinary subjects of fearful
contemplation, seemed scarcely entitled to a moment’s thought; the
dismal looking wreck, and _the horrid aspect and revenge of the whale_,
wholly engrossed my reflections, until day again made its appearance.”

In another place—p. 45,—he speaks of “_the mysterious and mortal attack
of the animal_.”

Secondly: The ship Union, also of Nantucket, was in the year 1807
totally lost off the Azores by a similar onset, but the authentic
particulars of this catastrophe I have never chanced to encounter,
though from the whale hunters I have now and then heard casual
allusions to it.

Thirdly: Some eighteen or twenty years ago Commodore J——, then
commanding an American sloop-of-war of the first class, happened to be
dining with a party of whaling captains, on board a Nantucket ship in
the harbor of Oahu, Sandwich Islands. Conversation turning upon whales,
the Commodore was pleased to be sceptical touching the amazing strength
ascribed to them by the professional gentlemen present. He peremptorily
denied for example, that any whale could so smite his stout
sloop-of-war as to cause her to leak so much as a thimbleful. Very
good; but there is more coming. Some weeks after, the Commodore set
sail in this impregnable craft for Valparaiso. But he was stopped on
the way by a portly sperm whale, that begged a few moments’
confidential business with him. That business consisted in fetching the
Commodore’s craft such a thwack, that with all his pumps going he made
straight for the nearest port to heave down and repair. I am not
superstitious, but I consider the Commodore’s interview with that whale
as providential. Was not Saul of Tarsus converted from unbelief by a
similar fright? I tell you, the sperm whale will stand no nonsense.

I will now refer you to Langsdorff’s Voyages for a little circumstance
in point, peculiarly interesting to the writer hereof. Langsdorff, you
must know by the way, was attached to the Russian Admiral Krusenstern’s
famous Discovery Expedition in the beginning of the present century.
Captain Langsdorff thus begins his seventeenth chapter:

“By the thirteenth of May our ship was ready to sail, and the next day
we were out in the open sea, on our way to Ochotsh. The weather was
very clear and fine, but so intolerably cold that we were obliged to
keep on our fur clothing. For some days we had very little wind; it was
not till the nineteenth that a brisk gale from the northwest sprang up.
An uncommon large whale, the body of which was larger than the ship
itself, lay almost at the surface of the water, but was not perceived
by any one on board till the moment when the ship, which was in full
sail, was almost upon him, so that it was impossible to prevent its
striking against him. We were thus placed in the most imminent danger,
as this gigantic creature, setting up its back, raised the ship three
feet at least out of the water. The masts reeled, and the sails fell
altogether, while we who were below all sprang instantly upon the deck,
concluding that we had struck upon some rock; instead of this we saw
the monster sailing off with the utmost gravity and solemnity. Captain
D’Wolf applied immediately to the pumps to examine whether or not the
vessel had received any damage from the shock, but we found that very
happily it had escaped entirely uninjured.”

Now, the Captain D’Wolf here alluded to as commanding the ship in
question, is a New Englander, who, after a long life of unusual
adventures as a sea-captain, this day resides in the village of
Dorchester near Boston. I have the honor of being a nephew of his. I
have particularly questioned him concerning this passage in Langsdorff.
He substantiates every word. The ship, however, was by no means a large
one: a Russian craft built on the Siberian coast, and purchased by my
uncle after bartering away the vessel in which he sailed from home.

In that up and down manly book of old-fashioned adventure, so full,
too, of honest wonders—the voyage of Lionel Wafer, one of ancient
Dampier’s old chums—I found a little matter set down so like that just
quoted from Langsdorff, that I cannot forbear inserting it here for a
corroborative example, if such be needed.

Lionel, it seems, was on his way to “John Ferdinando,” as he calls the
modern Juan Fernandes. “In our way thither,” he says, “about four
o’clock in the morning, when we were about one hundred and fifty
leagues from the Main of America, our ship felt a terrible shock, which
put our men in such consternation that they could hardly tell where
they were or what to think; but every one began to prepare for death.
And, indeed, the shock was so sudden and violent, that we took it for
granted the ship had struck against a rock; but when the amazement was
a little over, we cast the lead, and sounded, but found no ground. * *
* * * The suddenness of the shock made the guns leap in their
carriages, and several of the men were shaken out of their hammocks.
Captain Davis, who lay with his head on a gun, was thrown out of his
cabin!” Lionel then goes on to impute the shock to an earthquake, and
seems to substantiate the imputation by stating that a great
earthquake, somewhere about that time, did actually do great mischief
along the Spanish land. But I should not much wonder if, in the
darkness of that early hour of the morning, the shock was after all
caused by an unseen whale vertically bumping the hull from beneath.

I might proceed with several more examples, one way or another known to
me, of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale. In more
than one instance, he has been known, not only to chase the assailing
boats back to their ships, but to pursue the ship itself, and long
withstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks. The English ship
Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head; and, as for his strength, let
me say, that there have been examples where the lines attached to a
running sperm whale have, in a calm, been transferred to the ship, and
secured there; the whale towing her great hull through the water, as a
horse walks off with a cart. Again, it is very often observed that, if
the sperm whale, once struck, is allowed time to rally, he then acts,
not so often with blind rage, as with wilful, deliberate designs of
destruction to his pursuers; nor is it without conveying some eloquent
indication of his character, that upon being attacked he will
frequently open his mouth, and retain it in that dread expansion for
several consecutive minutes. But I must be content with only one more
and a concluding illustration; a remarkable and most significant one,
by which you will not fail to see, that not only is the most marvellous
event in this book corroborated by plain facts of the present day, but
that these marvels (like all marvels) are mere repetitions of the ages;
so that for the millionth time we say amen with Solomon—Verily there is
nothing new under the sun.

In the sixth Christian century lived Procopius, a Christian magistrate
of Constantinople, in the days when Justinian was Emperor and
Belisarius general. As many know, he wrote the history of his own
times, a work every way of uncommon value. By the best authorities, he
has always been considered a most trustworthy and unexaggerating
historian, except in some one or two particulars, not at all affecting
the matter presently to be mentioned.

Now, in this history of his, Procopius mentions that, during the term
of his prefecture at Constantinople, a great sea-monster was captured
in the neighboring Propontis, or Sea of Marmora, after having destroyed
vessels at intervals in those waters for a period of more than fifty
years. A fact thus set down in substantial history cannot easily be
gainsaid. Nor is there any reason it should be. Of what precise species
this sea-monster was, is not mentioned. But as he destroyed ships, as
well as for other reasons, he must have been a whale; and I am strongly
inclined to think a sperm whale. And I will tell you why. For a long
time I fancied that the sperm whale had been always unknown in the
Mediterranean and the deep waters connecting with it. Even now I am
certain that those seas are not, and perhaps never can be, in the
present constitution of things, a place for his habitual gregarious
resort. But further investigations have recently proved to me, that in
modern times there have been isolated instances of the presence of the
sperm whale in the Mediterranean. I am told, on good authority, that on
the Barbary coast, a Commodore Davis of the British navy found the
skeleton of a sperm whale. Now, as a vessel of war readily passes
through the Dardanelles, hence a sperm whale could, by the same route,
pass out of the Mediterranean into the Propontis.

In the Propontis, as far as I can learn, none of that peculiar
substance called _brit_ is to be found, the aliment of the right whale.
But I have every reason to believe that the food of the sperm
whale—squid or cuttle-fish—lurks at the bottom of that sea, because
large creatures, but by no means the largest of that sort, have been
found at its surface. If, then, you properly put these statements
together, and reason upon them a bit, you will clearly perceive that,
according to all human reasoning, Procopius’s sea-monster, that for
half a century stove the ships of a Roman Emperor, must in all
probability have been a sperm whale.


CHAPTER 46. Surmises.

Though, consumed with the hot fire of his purpose, Ahab in all his
thoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate capture of Moby
Dick; though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal interests to that
one passion; nevertheless it may have been that he was by nature and
long habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman’s ways, altogether
to abandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage. Or at least if
this were otherwise, there were not wanting other motives much more
influential with him. It would be refining too much, perhaps, even
considering his monomania, to hint that his vindictiveness towards the
White Whale might have possibly extended itself in some degree to all
sperm whales, and that the more monsters he slew by so much the more he
multiplied the chances that each subsequently encountered whale would
prove to be the hated one he hunted. But if such an hypothesis be
indeed exceptionable, there were still additional considerations which,
though not so strictly according with the wildness of his ruling
passion, yet were by no means incapable of swaying him.

To accomplish his object Ahab must use tools; and of all tools used in
the shadow of the moon, men are most apt to get out of order. He knew,
for example, that however magnetic his ascendency in some respects was
over Starbuck, yet that ascendency did not cover the complete spiritual
man any more than mere corporeal superiority involves intellectual
mastership; for to the purely spiritual, the intellectual but stand in
a sort of corporeal relation. Starbuck’s body and Starbuck’s coerced
will were Ahab’s, so long as Ahab kept his magnet at Starbuck’s brain;
still he knew that for all this the chief mate, in his soul, abhorred
his captain’s quest, and could he, would joyfully disintegrate himself
from it, or even frustrate it. It might be that a long interval would
elapse ere the White Whale was seen. During that long interval Starbuck
would ever be apt to fall into open relapses of rebellion against his
captain’s leadership, unless some ordinary, prudential, circumstantial
influences were brought to bear upon him. Not only that, but the subtle
insanity of Ahab respecting Moby Dick was noways more significantly
manifested than in his superlative sense and shrewdness in foreseeing
that, for the present, the hunt should in some way be stripped of that
strange imaginative impiousness which naturally invested it; that the
full terror of the voyage must be kept withdrawn into the obscure
background (for few men’s courage is proof against protracted
meditation unrelieved by action); that when they stood their long night
watches, his officers and men must have some nearer things to think of
than Moby Dick. For however eagerly and impetuously the savage crew had
hailed the announcement of his quest; yet all sailors of all sorts are
more or less capricious and unreliable—they live in the varying outer
weather, and they inhale its fickleness—and when retained for any
object remote and blank in the pursuit, however promissory of life and
passion in the end, it is above all things requisite that temporary
interests and employments should intervene and hold them healthily
suspended for the final dash.

Nor was Ahab unmindful of another thing. In times of strong emotion
mankind disdain all base considerations; but such times are evanescent.
The permanent constitutional condition of the manufactured man, thought
Ahab, is sordidness. Granting that the White Whale fully incites the
hearts of this my savage crew, and playing round their savageness even
breeds a certain generous knight-errantism in them, still, while for
the love of it they give chase to Moby Dick, they must also have food
for their more common, daily appetites. For even the high lifted and
chivalric Crusaders of old times were not content to traverse two
thousand miles of land to fight for their holy sepulchre, without
committing burglaries, picking pockets, and gaining other pious
perquisites by the way. Had they been strictly held to their one final
and romantic object—that final and romantic object, too many would have
turned from in disgust. I will not strip these men, thought Ahab, of
all hopes of cash—aye, cash. They may scorn cash now; but let some
months go by, and no perspective promise of it to them, and then this
same quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them, this same cash would
soon cashier Ahab.

Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more related
to Ahab personally. Having impulsively, it is probable, and perhaps
somewhat prematurely revealed the prime but private purpose of the
Pequod’s voyage, Ahab was now entirely conscious that, in so doing, he
had indirectly laid himself open to the unanswerable charge of
usurpation; and with perfect impunity, both moral and legal, his crew
if so disposed, and to that end competent, could refuse all further
obedience to him, and even violently wrest from him the command. From
even the barely hinted imputation of usurpation, and the possible
consequences of such a suppressed impression gaining ground, Ahab must
of course have been most anxious to protect himself. That protection
could only consist in his own predominating brain and heart and hand,
backed by a heedful, closely calculating attention to every minute
atmospheric influence which it was possible for his crew to be
subjected to.

For all these reasons then, and others perhaps too analytic to be
verbally developed here, Ahab plainly saw that he must still in a good
degree continue true to the natural, nominal purpose of the Pequod’s
voyage; observe all customary usages; and not only that, but force
himself to evince all his well known passionate interest in the general
pursuit of his profession.

Be all this as it may, his voice was now often heard hailing the three
mast-heads and admonishing them to keep a bright look-out, and not omit
reporting even a porpoise. This vigilance was not long without reward.


CHAPTER 47. The Mat-Maker.

It was a cloudy, sultry afternoon; the seamen were lazily lounging
about the decks, or vacantly gazing over into the lead-coloured waters.
Queequeg and I were mildly employed weaving what is called a sword-mat,
for an additional lashing to our boat. So still and subdued and yet
somehow preluding was all the scene, and such an incantation of reverie
lurked in the air, that each silent sailor seemed resolved into his own
invisible self.

I was the attendant or page of Queequeg, while busy at the mat. As I
kept passing and repassing the filling or woof of marline between the
long yarns of the warp, using my own hand for the shuttle, and as
Queequeg, standing sideways, ever and anon slid his heavy oaken sword
between the threads, and idly looking off upon the water, carelessly
and unthinkingly drove home every yarn: I say so strange a dreaminess
did there then reign all over the ship and all over the sea, only
broken by the intermitting dull sound of the sword, that it seemed as
if this were the Loom of Time, and I myself were a shuttle mechanically
weaving and weaving away at the Fates. There lay the fixed threads of
the warp subject to but one single, ever returning, unchanging
vibration, and that vibration merely enough to admit of the crosswise
interblending of other threads with its own. This warp seemed
necessity; and here, thought I, with my own hand I ply my own shuttle
and weave my own destiny into these unalterable threads. Meantime,
Queequeg’s impulsive, indifferent sword, sometimes hitting the woof
slantingly, or crookedly, or strongly, or weakly, as the case might be;
and by this difference in the concluding blow producing a corresponding
contrast in the final aspect of the completed fabric; this savage’s
sword, thought I, which thus finally shapes and fashions both warp and
woof; this easy, indifferent sword must be chance—aye, chance, free
will, and necessity—nowise incompatible—all interweavingly working
together. The straight warp of necessity, not to be swerved from its
ultimate course—its every alternating vibration, indeed, only tending
to that; free will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads;
and chance, though restrained in its play within the right lines of
necessity, and sideways in its motions directed by free will, though
thus prescribed to by both, chance by turns rules either, and has the
last featuring blow at events.

Thus we were weaving and weaving away when I started at a sound so
strange, long drawn, and musically wild and unearthly, that the ball of
free will dropped from my hand, and I stood gazing up at the clouds
whence that voice dropped like a wing. High aloft in the cross-trees
was that mad Gay-Header, Tashtego. His body was reaching eagerly
forward, his hand stretched out like a wand, and at brief sudden
intervals he continued his cries. To be sure the same sound was that
very moment perhaps being heard all over the seas, from hundreds of
whalemen’s look-outs perched as high in the air; but from few of those
lungs could that accustomed old cry have derived such a marvellous
cadence as from Tashtego the Indian’s.

As he stood hovering over you half suspended in air, so wildly and
eagerly peering towards the horizon, you would have thought him some
prophet or seer beholding the shadows of Fate, and by those wild cries
announcing their coming.

“There she blows! there! there! there! she blows! she blows!”

“Where-away?”

“On the lee-beam, about two miles off! a school of them!”

Instantly all was commotion.

The Sperm Whale blows as a clock ticks, with the same undeviating and
reliable uniformity. And thereby whalemen distinguish this fish from
other tribes of his genus.

“There go flukes!” was now the cry from Tashtego; and the whales
disappeared.

“Quick, steward!” cried Ahab. “Time! time!”

Dough-Boy hurried below, glanced at the watch, and reported the exact
minute to Ahab.

The ship was now kept away from the wind, and she went gently rolling
before it. Tashtego reporting that the whales had gone down heading to
leeward, we confidently looked to see them again directly in advance of
our bows. For that singular craft at times evinced by the Sperm Whale
when, sounding with his head in one direction, he nevertheless, while
concealed beneath the surface, mills round, and swiftly swims off in
the opposite quarter—this deceitfulness of his could not now be in
action; for there was no reason to suppose that the fish seen by
Tashtego had been in any way alarmed, or indeed knew at all of our
vicinity. One of the men selected for shipkeepers—that is, those not
appointed to the boats, by this time relieved the Indian at the
main-mast head. The sailors at the fore and mizzen had come down; the
line tubs were fixed in their places; the cranes were thrust out; the
mainyard was backed, and the three boats swung over the sea like three
samphire baskets over high cliffs. Outside of the bulwarks their eager
crews with one hand clung to the rail, while one foot was expectantly
poised on the gunwale. So look the long line of man-of-war’s men about
to throw themselves on board an enemy’s ship.

But at this critical instant a sudden exclamation was heard that took
every eye from the whale. With a start all glared at dark Ahab, who was
surrounded by five dusky phantoms that seemed fresh formed out of air.


CHAPTER 48. The First Lowering.

The phantoms, for so they then seemed, were flitting on the other side
of the deck, and, with a noiseless celerity, were casting loose the
tackles and bands of the boat which swung there. This boat had always
been deemed one of the spare boats, though technically called the
captain’s, on account of its hanging from the starboard quarter. The
figure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart, with one white
tooth evilly protruding from its steel-like lips. A rumpled Chinese
jacket of black cotton funereally invested him, with wide black
trowsers of the same dark stuff. But strangely crowning this ebonness
was a glistening white plaited turban, the living hair braided and
coiled round and round upon his head. Less swart in aspect, the
companions of this figure were of that vivid, tiger-yellow complexion
peculiar to some of the aboriginal natives of the Manillas;—a race
notorious for a certain diabolism of subtilty, and by some honest white
mariners supposed to be the paid spies and secret confidential agents
on the water of the devil, their lord, whose counting-room they suppose
to be elsewhere.

While yet the wondering ship’s company were gazing upon these
strangers, Ahab cried out to the white-turbaned old man at their head,
“All ready there, Fedallah?”

“Ready,” was the half-hissed reply.

“Lower away then; d’ye hear?” shouting across the deck. “Lower away
there, I say.”

Such was the thunder of his voice, that spite of their amazement the
men sprang over the rail; the sheaves whirled round in the blocks; with
a wallow, the three boats dropped into the sea; while, with a
dexterous, off-handed daring, unknown in any other vocation, the
sailors, goat-like, leaped down the rolling ship’s side into the tossed
boats below.

Hardly had they pulled out from under the ship’s lee, when a fourth
keel, coming from the windward side, pulled round under the stern, and
showed the five strangers rowing Ahab, who, standing erect in the
stern, loudly hailed Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, to spread themselves
widely, so as to cover a large expanse of water. But with all their
eyes again riveted upon the swart Fedallah and his crew, the inmates of
the other boats obeyed not the command.

“Captain Ahab?—” said Starbuck.

“Spread yourselves,” cried Ahab; “give way, all four boats. Thou,
Flask, pull out more to leeward!”

“Aye, aye, sir,” cheerily cried little King-Post, sweeping round his
great steering oar. “Lay back!” addressing his crew.
“There!—there!—there again! There she blows right ahead, boys!—lay
back!”

“Never heed yonder yellow boys, Archy.”

“Oh, I don’t mind ’em, sir,” said Archy; “I knew it all before now.
Didn’t I hear ’em in the hold? And didn’t I tell Cabaco here of it?
What say ye, Cabaco? They are stowaways, Mr. Flask.”

“Pull, pull, my fine hearts-alive; pull, my children; pull, my little
ones,” drawlingly and soothingly sighed Stubb to his crew, some of whom
still showed signs of uneasiness. “Why don’t you break your backbones,
my boys? What is it you stare at? Those chaps in yonder boat? Tut! They
are only five more hands come to help us—never mind from where—the more
the merrier. Pull, then, do pull; never mind the brimstone—devils are
good fellows enough. So, so; there you are now; that’s the stroke for a
thousand pounds; that’s the stroke to sweep the stakes! Hurrah for the
gold cup of sperm oil, my heroes! Three cheers, men—all hearts alive!
Easy, easy; don’t be in a hurry—don’t be in a hurry. Why don’t you snap
your oars, you rascals? Bite something, you dogs! So, so, so,
then:—softly, softly! That’s it—that’s it! long and strong. Give way
there, give way! The devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin rapscallions; ye are
all asleep. Stop snoring, ye sleepers, and pull. Pull, will ye? pull,
can’t ye? pull, won’t ye? Why in the name of gudgeons and ginger-cakes
don’t ye pull?—pull and break something! pull, and start your eyes out!
Here!” whipping out the sharp knife from his girdle; “every mother’s
son of ye draw his knife, and pull with the blade between his teeth.
That’s it—that’s it. Now ye do something; that looks like it, my
steel-bits. Start her—start her, my silver-spoons! Start her,
marling-spikes!”

Stubb’s exordium to his crew is given here at large, because he had
rather a peculiar way of talking to them in general, and especially in
inculcating the religion of rowing. But you must not suppose from this
specimen of his sermonizings that he ever flew into downright passions
with his congregation. Not at all; and therein consisted his chief
peculiarity. He would say the most terrific things to his crew, in a
tone so strangely compounded of fun and fury, and the fury seemed so
calculated merely as a spice to the fun, that no oarsman could hear
such queer invocations without pulling for dear life, and yet pulling
for the mere joke of the thing. Besides he all the time looked so easy
and indolent himself, so loungingly managed his steering-oar, and so
broadly gaped—open-mouthed at times—that the mere sight of such a
yawning commander, by sheer force of contrast, acted like a charm upon
the crew. Then again, Stubb was one of those odd sort of humorists,
whose jollity is sometimes so curiously ambiguous, as to put all
inferiors on their guard in the matter of obeying them.

In obedience to a sign from Ahab, Starbuck was now pulling obliquely
across Stubb’s bow; and when for a minute or so the two boats were
pretty near to each other, Stubb hailed the mate.

“Mr. Starbuck! larboard boat there, ahoy! a word with ye, sir, if ye
please!”

“Halloa!” returned Starbuck, turning round not a single inch as he
spoke; still earnestly but whisperingly urging his crew; his face set
like a flint from Stubb’s.

“What think ye of those yellow boys, sir!”

“Smuggled on board, somehow, before the ship sailed. (Strong, strong,
boys!)” in a whisper to his crew, then speaking out loud again: “A sad
business, Mr. Stubb! (seethe her, seethe her, my lads!) but never mind,
Mr. Stubb, all for the best. Let all your crew pull strong, come what
will. (Spring, my men, spring!) There’s hogsheads of sperm ahead, Mr.
Stubb, and that’s what ye came for. (Pull, my boys!) Sperm, sperm’s the
play! This at least is duty; duty and profit hand in hand.”

“Aye, aye, I thought as much,” soliloquized Stubb, when the boats
diverged, “as soon as I clapt eye on ’em, I thought so. Aye, and that’s
what he went into the after hold for, so often, as Dough-Boy long
suspected. They were hidden down there. The White Whale’s at the bottom
of it. Well, well, so be it! Can’t be helped! All right! Give way, men!
It ain’t the White Whale to-day! Give way!”

Now the advent of these outlandish strangers at such a critical instant
as the lowering of the boats from the deck, this had not unreasonably
awakened a sort of superstitious amazement in some of the ship’s
company; but Archy’s fancied discovery having some time previous got
abroad among them, though indeed not credited then, this had in some
small measure prepared them for the event. It took off the extreme edge
of their wonder; and so what with all this and Stubb’s confident way of
accounting for their appearance, they were for the time freed from
superstitious surmisings; though the affair still left abundant room
for all manner of wild conjectures as to dark Ahab’s precise agency in
the matter from the beginning. For me, I silently recalled the
mysterious shadows I had seen creeping on board the Pequod during the
dim Nantucket dawn, as well as the enigmatical hintings of the
unaccountable Elijah.

Meantime, Ahab, out of hearing of his officers, having sided the
furthest to windward, was still ranging ahead of the other boats; a
circumstance bespeaking how potent a crew was pulling him. Those tiger
yellow creatures of his seemed all steel and whalebone; like five
trip-hammers they rose and fell with regular strokes of strength, which
periodically started the boat along the water like a horizontal burst
boiler out of a Mississippi steamer. As for Fedallah, who was seen
pulling the harpooneer oar, he had thrown aside his black jacket, and
displayed his naked chest with the whole part of his body above the
gunwale, clearly cut against the alternating depressions of the watery
horizon; while at the other end of the boat Ahab, with one arm, like a
fencer’s, thrown half backward into the air, as if to counterbalance
any tendency to trip; Ahab was seen steadily managing his steering oar
as in a thousand boat lowerings ere the White Whale had torn him. All
at once the outstretched arm gave a peculiar motion and then remained
fixed, while the boat’s five oars were seen simultaneously peaked. Boat
and crew sat motionless on the sea. Instantly the three spread boats in
the rear paused on their way. The whales had irregularly settled bodily
down into the blue, thus giving no distantly discernible token of the
movement, though from his closer vicinity Ahab had observed it.

“Every man look out along his oars!” cried Starbuck. “Thou, Queequeg,
stand up!”

Nimbly springing up on the triangular raised box in the bow, the savage
stood erect there, and with intensely eager eyes gazed off towards the
spot where the chase had last been descried. Likewise upon the extreme
stern of the boat where it was also triangularly platformed level with
the gunwale, Starbuck himself was seen coolly and adroitly balancing
himself to the jerking tossings of his chip of a craft, and silently
eyeing the vast blue eye of the sea.

Not very far distant Flask’s boat was also lying breathlessly still;
its commander recklessly standing upon the top of the loggerhead, a
stout sort of post rooted in the keel, and rising some two feet above
the level of the stern platform. It is used for catching turns with the
whale line. Its top is not more spacious than the palm of a man’s hand,
and standing upon such a base as that, Flask seemed perched at the
mast-head of some ship which had sunk to all but her trucks. But little
King-Post was small and short, and at the same time little King-Post
was full of a large and tall ambition, so that this loggerhead
stand-point of his did by no means satisfy King-Post.

“I can’t see three seas off; tip us up an oar there, and let me on to
that.”

Upon this, Daggoo, with either hand upon the gunwale to steady his way,
swiftly slid aft, and then erecting himself volunteered his lofty
shoulders for a pedestal.

“Good a mast-head as any, sir. Will you mount?”

“That I will, and thank ye very much, my fine fellow; only I wish you
fifty feet taller.”

Whereupon planting his feet firmly against two opposite planks of the
boat, the gigantic negro, stooping a little, presented his flat palm to
Flask’s foot, and then putting Flask’s hand on his hearse-plumed head
and bidding him spring as he himself should toss, with one dexterous
fling landed the little man high and dry on his shoulders. And here was
Flask now standing, Daggoo with one lifted arm furnishing him with a
breastband to lean against and steady himself by.

At any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with what wondrous
habitude of unconscious skill the whaleman will maintain an erect
posture in his boat, even when pitched about by the most riotously
perverse and cross-running seas. Still more strange to see him giddily
perched upon the loggerhead itself, under such circumstances. But the
sight of little Flask mounted upon gigantic Daggoo was yet more
curious; for sustaining himself with a cool, indifferent, easy,
unthought of, barbaric majesty, the noble negro to every roll of the
sea harmoniously rolled his fine form. On his broad back, flaxen-haired
Flask seemed a snow-flake. The bearer looked nobler than the rider.
Though truly vivacious, tumultuous, ostentatious little Flask would now
and then stamp with impatience; but not one added heave did he thereby
give to the negro’s lordly chest. So have I seen Passion and Vanity
stamping the living magnanimous earth, but the earth did not alter her
tides and her seasons for that.

Meanwhile Stubb, the third mate, betrayed no such far-gazing
solicitudes. The whales might have made one of their regular soundings,
not a temporary dive from mere fright; and if that were the case,
Stubb, as his wont in such cases, it seems, was resolved to solace the
languishing interval with his pipe. He withdrew it from his hatband,
where he always wore it aslant like a feather. He loaded it, and rammed
home the loading with his thumb-end; but hardly had he ignited his
match across the rough sandpaper of his hand, when Tashtego, his
harpooneer, whose eyes had been setting to windward like two fixed
stars, suddenly dropped like light from his erect attitude to his seat,
crying out in a quick phrensy of hurry, “Down, down all, and give
way!—there they are!”

To a landsman, no whale, nor any sign of a herring, would have been
visible at that moment; nothing but a troubled bit of greenish white
water, and thin scattered puffs of vapor hovering over it, and
suffusingly blowing off to leeward, like the confused scud from white
rolling billows. The air around suddenly vibrated and tingled, as it
were, like the air over intensely heated plates of iron. Beneath this
atmospheric waving and curling, and partially beneath a thin layer of
water, also, the whales were swimming. Seen in advance of all the other
indications, the puffs of vapor they spouted, seemed their forerunning
couriers and detached flying outriders.

All four boats were now in keen pursuit of that one spot of troubled
water and air. But it bade fair to outstrip them; it flew on and on, as
a mass of interblending bubbles borne down a rapid stream from the
hills.

“Pull, pull, my good boys,” said Starbuck, in the lowest possible but
intensest concentrated whisper to his men; while the sharp fixed glance
from his eyes darted straight ahead of the bow, almost seemed as two
visible needles in two unerring binnacle compasses. He did not say much
to his crew, though, nor did his crew say anything to him. Only the
silence of the boat was at intervals startlingly pierced by one of his
peculiar whispers, now harsh with command, now soft with entreaty.

How different the loud little King-Post. “Sing out and say something,
my hearties. Roar and pull, my thunderbolts! Beach me, beach me on
their black backs, boys; only do that for me, and I’ll sign over to you
my Martha’s Vineyard plantation, boys; including wife and children,
boys. Lay me on—lay me on! O Lord, Lord! but I shall go stark, staring
mad! See! see that white water!” And so shouting, he pulled his hat
from his head, and stamped up and down on it; then picking it up,
flirted it far off upon the sea; and finally fell to rearing and
plunging in the boat’s stern like a crazed colt from the prairie.

“Look at that chap now,” philosophically drawled Stubb, who, with his
unlighted short pipe, mechanically retained between his teeth, at a
short distance, followed after—“He’s got fits, that Flask has. Fits?
yes, give him fits—that’s the very word—pitch fits into ’em. Merrily,
merrily, hearts-alive. Pudding for supper, you know;—merry’s the word.
Pull, babes—pull, sucklings—pull, all. But what the devil are you
hurrying about? Softly, softly, and steadily, my men. Only pull, and
keep pulling; nothing more. Crack all your backbones, and bite your
knives in two—that’s all. Take it easy—why don’t ye take it easy, I
say, and burst all your livers and lungs!”

But what it was that inscrutable Ahab said to that tiger-yellow crew of
his—these were words best omitted here; for you live under the blessed
light of the evangelical land. Only the infidel sharks in the audacious
seas may give ear to such words, when, with tornado brow, and eyes of
red murder, and foam-glued lips, Ahab leaped after his prey.

Meanwhile, all the boats tore on. The repeated specific allusions of
Flask to “that whale,” as he called the fictitious monster which he
declared to be incessantly tantalizing his boat’s bow with its
tail—these allusions of his were at times so vivid and life-like, that
they would cause some one or two of his men to snatch a fearful look
over the shoulder. But this was against all rule; for the oarsmen must
put out their eyes, and ram a skewer through their necks; usage
pronouncing that they must have no organs but ears, and no limbs but
arms, in these critical moments.

It was a sight full of quick wonder and awe! The vast swells of the
omnipotent sea; the surging, hollow roar they made, as they rolled
along the eight gunwales, like gigantic bowls in a boundless
bowling-green; the brief suspended agony of the boat, as it would tip
for an instant on the knife-like edge of the sharper waves, that almost
seemed threatening to cut it in two; the sudden profound dip into the
watery glens and hollows; the keen spurrings and goadings to gain the
top of the opposite hill; the headlong, sled-like slide down its other
side;—all these, with the cries of the headsmen and harpooneers, and
the shuddering gasps of the oarsmen, with the wondrous sight of the
ivory Pequod bearing down upon her boats with outstretched sails, like
a wild hen after her screaming brood;—all this was thrilling.

Not the raw recruit, marching from the bosom of his wife into the fever
heat of his first battle; not the dead man’s ghost encountering the
first unknown phantom in the other world;—neither of these can feel
stranger and stronger emotions than that man does, who for the first
time finds himself pulling into the charmed, churned circle of the
hunted sperm whale.

The dancing white water made by the chase was now becoming more and
more visible, owing to the increasing darkness of the dun cloud-shadows
flung upon the sea. The jets of vapor no longer blended, but tilted
everywhere to right and left; the whales seemed separating their wakes.
The boats were pulled more apart; Starbuck giving chase to three whales
running dead to leeward. Our sail was now set, and, with the still
rising wind, we rushed along; the boat going with such madness through
the water, that the lee oars could scarcely be worked rapidly enough to
escape being torn from the row-locks.

Soon we were running through a suffusing wide veil of mist; neither
ship nor boat to be seen.

“Give way, men,” whispered Starbuck, drawing still further aft the
sheet of his sail; “there is time to kill a fish yet before the squall
comes. There’s white water again!—close to! Spring!”

Soon after, two cries in quick succession on each side of us denoted
that the other boats had got fast; but hardly were they overheard, when
with a lightning-like hurtling whisper Starbuck said: “Stand up!” and
Queequeg, harpoon in hand, sprang to his feet.

Though not one of the oarsmen was then facing the life and death peril
so close to them ahead, yet with their eyes on the intense countenance
of the mate in the stern of the boat, they knew that the imminent
instant had come; they heard, too, an enormous wallowing sound as of
fifty elephants stirring in their litter. Meanwhile the boat was still
booming through the mist, the waves curling and hissing around us like
the erected crests of enraged serpents.

“That’s his hump. _There_, _there_, give it to him!” whispered
Starbuck.

A short rushing sound leaped out of the boat; it was the darted iron of
Queequeg. Then all in one welded commotion came an invisible push from
astern, while forward the boat seemed striking on a ledge; the sail
collapsed and exploded; a gush of scalding vapor shot up near by;
something rolled and tumbled like an earthquake beneath us. The whole
crew were half suffocated as they were tossed helter-skelter into the
white curdling cream of the squall. Squall, whale, and harpoon had all
blended together; and the whale, merely grazed by the iron, escaped.

Though completely swamped, the boat was nearly unharmed. Swimming round
it we picked up the floating oars, and lashing them across the gunwale,
tumbled back to our places. There we sat up to our knees in the sea,
the water covering every rib and plank, so that to our downward gazing
eyes the suspended craft seemed a coral boat grown up to us from the
bottom of the ocean.

The wind increased to a howl; the waves dashed their bucklers together;
the whole squall roared, forked, and crackled around us like a white
fire upon the prairie, in which, unconsumed, we were burning; immortal
in these jaws of death! In vain we hailed the other boats; as well roar
to the live coals down the chimney of a flaming furnace as hail those
boats in that storm. Meanwhile the driving scud, rack, and mist, grew
darker with the shadows of night; no sign of the ship could be seen.
The rising sea forbade all attempts to bale out the boat. The oars were
useless as propellers, performing now the office of life-preservers.
So, cutting the lashing of the waterproof match keg, after many
failures Starbuck contrived to ignite the lamp in the lantern; then
stretching it on a waif pole, handed it to Queequeg as the
standard-bearer of this forlorn hope. There, then, he sat, holding up
that imbecile candle in the heart of that almighty forlornness. There,
then, he sat, the sign and symbol of a man without faith, hopelessly
holding up hope in the midst of despair.

Wet, drenched through, and shivering cold, despairing of ship or boat,
we lifted up our eyes as the dawn came on. The mist still spread over
the sea, the empty lantern lay crushed in the bottom of the boat.
Suddenly Queequeg started to his feet, hollowing his hand to his ear.
We all heard a faint creaking, as of ropes and yards hitherto muffled
by the storm. The sound came nearer and nearer; the thick mists were
dimly parted by a huge, vague form. Affrighted, we all sprang into the
sea as the ship at last loomed into view, bearing right down upon us
within a distance of not much more than its length.

Floating on the waves we saw the abandoned boat, as for one instant it
tossed and gaped beneath the ship’s bows like a chip at the base of a
cataract; and then the vast hull rolled over it, and it was seen no
more till it came up weltering astern. Again we swam for it, were
dashed against it by the seas, and were at last taken up and safely
landed on board. Ere the squall came close to, the other boats had cut
loose from their fish and returned to the ship in good time. The ship
had given us up, but was still cruising, if haply it might light upon
some token of our perishing,—an oar or a lance pole.


CHAPTER 49. The Hyena.

There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed
affair we call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast
practical joke, though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more
than suspects that the joke is at nobody’s expense but his own.
However, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while disputing. He
bolts down all events, all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions, all
hard things visible and invisible, never mind how knobby; as an ostrich
of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints. And as for
small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden disaster, peril
of life and limb; all these, and death itself, seem to him only sly,
good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side bestowed by the unseen
and unaccountable old joker. That odd sort of wayward mood I am
speaking of, comes over a man only in some time of extreme tribulation;
it comes in the very midst of his earnestness, so that what just before
might have seemed to him a thing most momentous, now seems but a part
of the general joke. There is nothing like the perils of whaling to
breed this free and easy sort of genial, desperado philosophy; and with
it I now regarded this whole voyage of the Pequod, and the great White
Whale its object.

“Queequeg,” said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the
deck, and I was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the
water; “Queequeg, my fine friend, does this sort of thing often
happen?” Without much emotion, though soaked through just like me, he
gave me to understand that such things did often happen.

“Mr. Stubb,” said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his
oil-jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; “Mr. Stubb, I
think I have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our chief
mate, Mr. Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent. I suppose
then, that going plump on a flying whale with your sail set in a foggy
squall is the height of a whaleman’s discretion?”

“Certain. I’ve lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off
Cape Horn.”

“Mr. Flask,” said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing
close by; “you are experienced in these things, and I am not. Will you
tell me whether it is an unalterable law in this fishery, Mr. Flask,
for an oarsman to break his own back pulling himself back-foremost into
death’s jaws?”

“Can’t you twist that smaller?” said Flask. “Yes, that’s the law. I
should like to see a boat’s crew backing water up to a whale face
foremost. Ha, ha! the whale would give them squint for squint, mind
that!”

Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate statement
of the entire case. Considering, therefore, that squalls and capsizings
in the water and consequent bivouacks on the deep, were matters of
common occurrence in this kind of life; considering that at the
superlatively critical instant of going on to the whale I must resign
my life into the hands of him who steered the boat—oftentimes a fellow
who at that very moment is in his impetuousness upon the point of
scuttling the craft with his own frantic stampings; considering that
the particular disaster to our own particular boat was chiefly to be
imputed to Starbuck’s driving on to his whale almost in the teeth of a
squall, and considering that Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous for
his great heedfulness in the fishery; considering that I belonged to
this uncommonly prudent Starbuck’s boat; and finally considering in
what a devil’s chase I was implicated, touching the White Whale: taking
all things together, I say, I thought I might as well go below and make
a rough draft of my will. “Queequeg,” said I, “come along, you shall be
my lawyer, executor, and legatee.”

It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at
their last wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world
more fond of that diversion. This was the fourth time in my nautical
life that I had done the same thing. After the ceremony was concluded
upon the present occasion, I felt all the easier; a stone was rolled
away from my heart. Besides, all the days I should now live would be as
good as the days that Lazarus lived after his resurrection; a
supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks as the case might
be. I survived myself; my death and burial were locked up in my chest.
I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly, like a quiet ghost with a
clean conscience sitting inside the bars of a snug family vault.

Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock,
here goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the
devil fetch the hindmost.


CHAPTER 50. Ahab’s Boat and Crew. Fedallah.

“Who would have thought it, Flask!” cried Stubb; “if I had but one leg
you would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the plug-hole
with my timber toe. Oh! he’s a wonderful old man!”

“I don’t think it so strange, after all, on that account,” said Flask.
“If his leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different thing.
That would disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of the other
left, you know.”

“I don’t know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel.”

Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, considering
the paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it
is right for a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active
perils of the chase. So Tamerlane’s soldiers often argued with tears in
their eyes, whether that invaluable life of his ought to be carried
into the thickest of the fight.

But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect. Considering that
with two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of danger;
considering that the pursuit of whales is always under great and
extraordinary difficulties; that every individual moment, indeed, then
comprises a peril; under these circumstances is it wise for any maimed
man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt? As a general thing, the
joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought not.

Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little of
his entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes of
the chase, for the sake of being near the scene of action and giving
his orders in person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat actually
apportioned to him as a regular headsman in the hunt—above all for
Captain Ahab to be supplied with five extra men, as that same boat’s
crew, he well knew that such generous conceits never entered the heads
of the owners of the Pequod. Therefore he had not solicited a boat’s
crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his desires on that head.
Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own touching all that
matter. Until Cabaco’s published discovery, the sailors had little
foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a little while out of
port, all hands had concluded the customary business of fitting the
whaleboats for service; when some time after this Ahab was now and then
found bestirring himself in the matter of making thole-pins with his
own hands for what was thought to be one of the spare boats, and even
solicitously cutting the small wooden skewers, which when the line is
running out are pinned over the groove in the bow: when all this was
observed in him, and particularly his solicitude in having an extra
coat of sheathing in the bottom of the boat, as if to make it better
withstand the pointed pressure of his ivory limb; and also the anxiety
he evinced in exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it
is sometimes called, the horizontal piece in the boat’s bow for bracing
the knee against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was
observed how often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee
fixed in the semi-circular depression in the cleat, and with the
carpenter’s chisel gouged out a little here and straightened it a
little there; all these things, I say, had awakened much interest and
curiosity at the time. But almost everybody supposed that this
particular preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be with a view to
the ultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed his
intention to hunt that mortal monster in person. But such a supposition
did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any boat’s crew
being assigned to that boat.

Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned
away; for in a whaler wonders soon wane. Besides, now and then such
unaccountable odds and ends of strange nations come up from the unknown
nooks and ash-holes of the earth to man these floating outlaws of
whalers; and the ships themselves often pick up such queer castaway
creatures found tossing about the open sea on planks, bits of wreck,
oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks, and what not; that
Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step down into the cabin
to chat with the captain, and it would not create any unsubduable
excitement in the forecastle.

But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate
phantoms soon found their place among the crew, though still as it were
somehow distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a
muffled mystery to the last. Whence he came in a mannerly world like
this, by what sort of unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be
linked with Ahab’s peculiar fortunes; nay, so far as to have some sort
of a half-hinted influence; Heaven knows, but it might have been even
authority over him; all this none knew. But one cannot sustain an
indifferent air concerning Fedallah. He was such a creature as
civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their
dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and then glide
among the unchanging Asiatic communities, especially the Oriental isles
to the east of the continent—those insulated, immemorial, unalterable
countries, which even in these modern days still preserve much of the
ghostly aboriginalness of earth’s primal generations, when the memory
of the first man was a distinct recollection, and all men his
descendants, unknowing whence he came, eyed each other as real
phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon why they were created and
to what end; when though, according to Genesis, the angels indeed
consorted with the daughters of men, the devils also, add the
uncanonical Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours.


CHAPTER 51. The Spirit-Spout.

Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly
swept across four several cruising-grounds; that off the Azores; off
the Cape de Verdes; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth of
the Rio de la Plata; and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, watery
locality, southerly from St. Helena.

It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and
moonlight night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver;
and, by their soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silvery
silence, not a solitude; on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen
far in advance of the white bubbles at the bow. Lit up by the moon, it
looked celestial; seemed some plumed and glittering god uprising from
the sea. Fedallah first descried this jet. For of these moonlight
nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast head, and stand a
look-out there, with the same precision as if it had been day. And yet,
though herds of whales were seen by night, not one whaleman in a
hundred would venture a lowering for them. You may think with what
emotions, then, the seamen beheld this old Oriental perched aloft at
such unusual hours; his turban and the moon, companions in one sky. But
when, after spending his uniform interval there for several successive
nights without uttering a single sound; when, after all this silence,
his unearthly voice was heard announcing that silvery, moon-lit jet,
every reclining mariner started to his feet as if some winged spirit
had lighted in the rigging, and hailed the mortal crew. “There she
blows!” Had the trump of judgment blown, they could not have quivered
more; yet still they felt no terror; rather pleasure. For though it was
a most unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously
exciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a
lowering.

Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded the
t’gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread. The
best man in the ship must take the helm. Then, with every mast-head
manned, the piled-up craft rolled down before the wind. The strange,
upheaving, lifting tendency of the taffrail breeze filling the hollows
of so many sails, made the buoyant, hovering deck to feel like air
beneath the feet; while still she rushed along, as if two antagonistic
influences were struggling in her—one to mount direct to heaven, the
other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal. And had you watched
Ahab’s face that night, you would have thought that in him also two
different things were warring. While his one live leg made lively
echoes along the deck, every stroke of his dead limb sounded like a
coffin-tap. On life and death this old man walked. But though the ship
so swiftly sped, and though from every eye, like arrows, the eager
glances shot, yet the silvery jet was no more seen that night. Every
sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second time.

This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some days
after, lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced: again it
was descried by all; but upon making sail to overtake it, once more it
disappeared as if it had never been. And so it served us night after
night, till no one heeded it but to wonder at it. Mysteriously jetted
into the clear moonlight, or starlight, as the case might be;
disappearing again for one whole day, or two days, or three; and
somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be advancing still
further and further in our van, this solitary jet seemed for ever
alluring us on.

Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordance
with the preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things invested
the Pequod, were there wanting some of the seamen who swore that
whenever and wherever descried; at however remote times, or in however
far apart latitudes and longitudes, that unnearable spout was cast by
one self-same whale; and that whale, Moby Dick. For a time, there
reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at this flitting apparition, as
if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on, in order that the
monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last in the remotest
and most savage seas.

These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a
wondrous potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in
which, beneath all its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a
devilish charm, as for days and days we voyaged along, through seas so
wearily, lonesomely mild, that all space, in repugnance to our vengeful
errand, seemed vacating itself of life before our urn-like prow.

But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds began
howling around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas
that are there; when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the
blast, and gored the dark waves in her madness, till, like showers of
silver chips, the foam-flakes flew over her bulwarks; then all this
desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave place to sights more
dismal than before.

Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and thither
before us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable sea-ravens. And
every morning, perched on our stays, rows of these birds were seen; and
spite of our hootings, for a long time obstinately clung to the hemp,
as though they deemed our ship some drifting, uninhabited craft; a
thing appointed to desolation, and therefore fit roosting-place for
their homeless selves. And heaved and heaved, still unrestingly heaved
the black sea, as if its vast tides were a conscience; and the great
mundane soul were in anguish and remorse for the long sin and suffering
it had bred.

Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye? Rather Cape Tormentoso, as called
of yore; for long allured by the perfidious silences that before had
attended us, we found ourselves launched into this tormented sea, where
guilty beings transformed into those fowls and these fish, seemed
condemned to swim on everlastingly without any haven in store, or beat
that black air without any horizon. But calm, snow-white, and
unvarying; still directing its fountain of feathers to the sky; still
beckoning us on from before, the solitary jet would at times be
descried.

During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming for
the time the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous
deck, manifested the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever
addressed his mates. In tempestuous times like these, after everything
above and aloft has been secured, nothing more can be done but
passively to await the issue of the gale. Then Captain and crew become
practical fatalists. So, with his ivory leg inserted into its
accustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud, Ahab for
hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an
occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very
eyelashes together. Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part of
the ship by the perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows,
stood in a line along the bulwarks in the waist; and the better to
guard against the leaping waves, each man had slipped himself into a
sort of bowline secured to the rail, in which he swung as in a loosened
belt. Few or no words were spoken; and the silent ship, as if manned by
painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on through all the swift
madness and gladness of the demoniac waves. By night the same muteness
of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean prevailed; still in silence
the men swung in the bowlines; still wordless Ahab stood up to the
blast. Even when wearied nature seemed demanding repose he would not
seek that repose in his hammock. Never could Starbuck forget the old
man’s aspect, when one night going down into the cabin to mark how the
barometer stood, he saw him with closed eyes sitting straight in his
floor-screwed chair; the rain and half-melted sleet of the storm from
which he had some time before emerged, still slowly dripping from the
unremoved hat and coat. On the table beside him lay unrolled one of
those charts of tides and currents which have previously been spoken
of. His lantern swung from his tightly clenched hand. Though the body
was erect, the head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were
pointed towards the needle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in
the ceiling.*

*The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to
the compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himself
of the course of the ship.

Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this
gale, still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.


CHAPTER 52. The Albatross.

South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a good cruising
ground for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney (Albatross)
by name. As she slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at the
fore-mast-head, I had a good view of that sight so remarkable to a tyro
in the far ocean fisheries—a whaler at sea, and long absent from home.

As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the
skeleton of a stranded walrus. All down her sides, this spectral
appearance was traced with long channels of reddened rust, while all
her spars and her rigging were like the thick branches of trees furred
over with hoar-frost. Only her lower sails were set. A wild sight it
was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those three mast-heads. They
seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and bepatched the raiment
that had survived nearly four years of cruising. Standing in iron hoops
nailed to the mast, they swayed and swung over a fathomless sea; and
though, when the ship slowly glided close under our stern, we six men
in the air came so nigh to each other that we might almost have leaped
from the mast-heads of one ship to those of the other; yet, those
forlorn-looking fishermen, mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not
one word to our own look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being
heard from below.

“Ship ahoy! Have ye seen the White Whale?”

But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was in
the act of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his
hand into the sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove to
make himself heard without it. Meantime his ship was still increasing
the distance between. While in various silent ways the seamen of the
Pequod were evincing their observance of this ominous incident at the
first mere mention of the White Whale’s name to another ship, Ahab for
a moment paused; it almost seemed as though he would have lowered a
boat to board the stranger, had not the threatening wind forbade. But
taking advantage of his windward position, he again seized his trumpet,
and knowing by her aspect that the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer
and shortly bound home, he loudly hailed—“Ahoy there! This is the
Pequod, bound round the world! Tell them to address all future letters
to the Pacific ocean! and this time three years, if I am not at home,
tell them to address them to ——”

At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly, then,
in accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small harmless fish,
that for some days before had been placidly swimming by our side,
darted away with what seemed shuddering fins, and ranged themselves
fore and aft with the stranger’s flanks. Though in the course of his
continual voyagings Ahab must often before have noticed a similar
sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest trifles capriciously
carry meanings.

“Swim away from me, do ye?” murmured Ahab, gazing over into the water.
There seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed more of
deep helpless sadness than the insane old man had ever before evinced.
But turning to the steersman, who thus far had been holding the ship in
the wind to diminish her headway, he cried out in his old lion
voice,—“Up helm! Keep her off round the world!”

Round the world! There is much in that sound to inspire proud feelings;
but whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct? Only through
numberless perils to the very point whence we started, where those that
we left behind secure, were all the time before us.

Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could for
ever reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and strange
than any Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were promise
in the voyage. But in pursuit of those far mysteries we dream of, or in
tormented chase of that demon phantom that, some time or other, swims
before all human hearts; while chasing such over this round globe, they
either lead us on in barren mazes or midway leave us whelmed.


CHAPTER 53. The Gam.

The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we had
spoken was this: the wind and sea betokened storms. But even had this
not been the case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded
her—judging by his subsequent conduct on similar occasions—if so it had
been that, by the process of hailing, he had obtained a negative answer
to the question he put. For, as it eventually turned out, he cared not
to consort, even for five minutes, with any stranger captain, except he
could contribute some of that information he so absorbingly sought. But
all this might remain inadequately estimated, were not something said
here of the peculiar usages of whaling-vessels when meeting each other
in foreign seas, and especially on a common cruising-ground.

If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the
equally desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually encountering
each other in such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life of
them, cannot well avoid a mutual salutation; and stopping for a moment
to interchange the news; and, perhaps, sitting down for a while and
resting in concert: then, how much more natural that upon the
illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the sea, two whaling
vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth—off lone
Fanning’s Island, or the far away King’s Mills; how much more natural,
I say, that under such circumstances these ships should not only
interchange hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and
sociable contact. And especially would this seem to be a matter of
course, in the case of vessels owned in one seaport, and whose
captains, officers, and not a few of the men are personally known to
each other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear domestic things to
talk about.

For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters on
board; at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers of a
date a year or two later than the last one on her blurred and
thumb-worn files. And in return for that courtesy, the outward-bound
ship would receive the latest whaling intelligence from the
cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of the utmost
importance to her. And in degree, all this will hold true concerning
whaling vessels crossing each other’s track on the cruising-ground
itself, even though they are equally long absent from home. For one of
them may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and now
far remote vessel; and some of those letters may be for the people of
the ship she now meets. Besides, they would exchange the whaling news,
and have an agreeable chat. For not only would they meet with all the
sympathies of sailors, but likewise with all the peculiar
congenialities arising from a common pursuit and mutually shared
privations and perils.

Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference;
that is, so long as both parties speak one language, as is the case
with Americans and English. Though, to be sure, from the small number
of English whalers, such meetings do not very often occur, and when
they do occur there is too apt to be a sort of shyness between them;
for your Englishman is rather reserved, and your Yankee, he does not
fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself. Besides, the English
whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan superiority over the
American whalers; regarding the long, lean Nantucketer, with his
nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of sea-peasant. But where this
superiority in the English whalemen does really consist, it would be
hard to say, seeing that the Yankees in one day, collectively, kill
more whales than all the English, collectively, in ten years. But this
is a harmless little foible in the English whale-hunters, which the
Nantucketer does not take much to heart; probably, because he knows
that he has a few foibles himself.

So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, the
whalers have most reason to be sociable—and they are so. Whereas, some
merchant ships crossing each other’s wake in the mid-Atlantic, will
oftentimes pass on without so much as a single word of recognition,
mutually cutting each other on the high seas, like a brace of dandies
in Broadway; and all the time indulging, perhaps, in finical criticism
upon each other’s rig. As for Men-of-War, when they chance to meet at
sea, they first go through such a string of silly bowings and
scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that there does not seem to be
much right-down hearty good-will and brotherly love about it at all. As
touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are in such a prodigious hurry,
they run away from each other as soon as possible. And as for Pirates,
when they chance to cross each other’s cross-bones, the first hail
is—“How many skulls?”—the same way that whalers hail—“How many
barrels?” And that question once answered, pirates straightway steer
apart, for they are infernal villains on both sides, and don’t like to
see overmuch of each other’s villanous likenesses.

But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable,
free-and-easy whaler! What does the whaler do when she meets another
whaler in any sort of decent weather? She has a “_Gam_,” a thing so
utterly unknown to all other ships that they never heard of the name
even; and if by chance they should hear of it, they only grin at it,
and repeat gamesome stuff about “spouters” and “blubber-boilers,” and
such like pretty exclamations. Why it is that all Merchant-seamen, and
also all Pirates and Man-of-War’s men, and Slave-ship sailors, cherish
such a scornful feeling towards Whale-ships; this is a question it
would be hard to answer. Because, in the case of pirates, say, I should
like to know whether that profession of theirs has any peculiar glory
about it. It sometimes ends in uncommon elevation, indeed; but only at
the gallows. And besides, when a man is elevated in that odd fashion,
he has no proper foundation for his superior altitude. Hence, I
conclude, that in boasting himself to be high lifted above a whaleman,
in that assertion the pirate has no solid basis to stand on.

But what is a _Gam?_ You might wear out your index-finger running up
and down the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word. Dr.
Johnson never attained to that erudition; Noah Webster’s ark does not
hold it. Nevertheless, this same expressive word has now for many years
been in constant use among some fifteen thousand true born Yankees.
Certainly, it needs a definition, and should be incorporated into the
Lexicon. With that view, let me learnedly define it.

GAM. NOUN—_A social meeting of two_ (_or more_) _Whaleships, generally
on a cruising-ground; when, after exchanging hails, they exchange
visits by boats’ crews: the two captains remaining, for the time, on
board of one ship, and the two chief mates on the other._

There is another little item about Gamming which must not be forgotten
here. All professions have their own little peculiarities of detail; so
has the whale fishery. In a pirate, man-of-war, or slave ship, when the
captain is rowed anywhere in his boat, he always sits in the stern
sheets on a comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat there, and often
steers himself with a pretty little milliner’s tiller decorated with
gay cords and ribbons. But the whale-boat has no seat astern, no sofa
of that sort whatever, and no tiller at all. High times indeed, if
whaling captains were wheeled about the water on castors like gouty old
aldermen in patent chairs. And as for a tiller, the whale-boat never
admits of any such effeminacy; and therefore as in gamming a complete
boat’s crew must leave the ship, and hence as the boat steerer or
harpooneer is of the number, that subordinate is the steersman upon the
occasion, and the captain, having no place to sit in, is pulled off to
his visit all standing like a pine tree. And often you will notice that
being conscious of the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him
from the sides of the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to
the importance of sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs. Nor
is this any very easy matter; for in his rear is the immense projecting
steering oar hitting him now and then in the small of his back, the
after-oar reciprocating by rapping his knees in front. He is thus
completely wedged before and behind, and can only expand himself
sideways by settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden, violent
pitch of the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of
foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth. Merely make a
spread angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up. Then, again,
it would never do in plain sight of the world’s riveted eyes, it would
never do, I say, for this straddling captain to be seen steadying
himself the slightest particle by catching hold of anything with his
hands; indeed, as token of his entire, buoyant self-command, he
generally carries his hands in his trowsers’ pockets; but perhaps being
generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for ballast.
Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well authenticated ones
too, where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment
or two, in a sudden squall say—to seize hold of the nearest oarsman’s
hair, and hold on there like grim death.


CHAPTER 54. The Town-Ho’s Story.

(_As told at the Golden Inn._)

The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there, is
much like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you meet
more travellers than in any other part.

It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another
homeward-bound whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered. She was manned
almost wholly by Polynesians. In the short gam that ensued she gave us
strong news of Moby Dick. To some the general interest in the White
Whale was now wildly heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho’s
story, which seemed obscurely to involve with the whale a certain
wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those so called judgments of
God which at times are said to overtake some men. This latter
circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming what may
be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated, never
reached the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates. For that secret part of
the story was unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself. It was the
private property of three confederate white seamen of that ship, one of
whom, it seems, communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of
secrecy, but the following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and
revealed so much of it in that way, that when he was wakened he could
not well withhold the rest. Nevertheless, so potent an influence did
this thing have on those seamen in the Pequod who came to the full
knowledge of it, and by such a strange delicacy, to call it so, were
they governed in this matter, that they kept the secret among
themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod’s main-mast.
Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story as
publicly narrated on the ship, the whole of this strange affair I now
proceed to put on lasting record.

*The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head,
still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin.

For my humor’s sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once
narrated it at Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one
saint’s eve, smoking upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden
Inn. Of those fine cavaliers, the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian, were
on the closer terms with me; and hence the interluding questions they
occasionally put, and which are duly answered at the time.

“Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about
rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of Nantucket,
was cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days’ sail eastward
from the eaves of this good Golden Inn. She was somewhere to the
northward of the Line. One morning upon handling the pumps, according
to daily usage, it was observed that she made more water in her hold
than common. They supposed a sword-fish had stabbed her, gentlemen. But
the captain, having some unusual reason for believing that rare good
luck awaited him in those latitudes; and therefore being very averse to
quit them, and the leak not being then considered at all dangerous,
though, indeed, they could not find it after searching the hold as low
down as was possible in rather heavy weather, the ship still continued
her cruisings, the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy
intervals; but no good luck came; more days went by, and not only was
the leak yet undiscovered, but it sensibly increased. So much so, that
now taking some alarm, the captain, making all sail, stood away for the
nearest harbor among the islands, there to have his hull hove out and
repaired.

“Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chance
favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the
way, because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically
relieved at them, those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the
ship free; never mind if the leak should double on her. In truth, well
nigh the whole of this passage being attended by very prosperous
breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly arrived in perfect safety at
her port without the occurrence of the least fatality, had it not been
for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the mate, a Vineyarder, and the
bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt, a Lakeman and desperado from
Buffalo.

“‘Lakeman!—Buffalo! Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?’
said Don Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.

“On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but—I crave your
courtesy—may be, you shall soon hear further of all that. Now,
gentlemen, in square-sail brigs and three-masted ships, well-nigh as
large and stout as any that ever sailed out of your old Callao to far
Manilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart of our America, had yet
been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting impressions popularly
connected with the open ocean. For in their interflowing aggregate,
those grand fresh-water seas of ours,—Erie, and Ontario, and Huron, and
Superior, and Michigan,—possess an ocean-like expansiveness, with many
of the ocean’s noblest traits; with many of its rimmed varieties of
races and of climes. They contain round archipelagoes of romantic
isles, even as the Polynesian waters do; in large part, are shored by
two great contrasting nations, as the Atlantic is; they furnish long
maritime approaches to our numerous territorial colonies from the East,
dotted all round their banks; here and there are frowned upon by
batteries, and by the goat-like craggy guns of lofty Mackinaw; they
have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories; at intervals, they
yield their beaches to wild barbarians, whose red painted faces flash
from out their peltry wigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked by
ancient and unentered forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried
lines of kings in Gothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild
Afric beasts of prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give
robes to Tartar Emperors; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and
Cleveland, as well as Winnebago villages; they float alike the
full-rigged merchant ship, the armed cruiser of the State, the steamer,
and the beech canoe; they are swept by Borean and dismasting blasts as
direful as any that lash the salted wave; they know what shipwrecks
are, for out of sight of land, however inland, they have drowned full
many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew. Thus, gentlemen,
though an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean
nurtured; as much of an audacious mariner as any. And for Radney,
though in his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket
beach, to nurse at his maternal sea; though in after life he had long
followed our austere Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was
he quite as vengeful and full of social quarrel as the backwoods
seaman, fresh from the latitudes of buck-horn handled Bowie-knives. Yet
was this Nantucketer a man with some good-hearted traits; and this
Lakeman, a mariner, who though a sort of devil indeed, might yet by
inflexible firmness, only tempered by that common decency of human
recognition which is the meanest slave’s right; thus treated, this
Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile. At all events, he
had proved so thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and
Steelkilt—but, gentlemen, you shall hear.

“It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her
prow for her island haven, that the Town-Ho’s leak seemed again
increasing, but only so as to require an hour or more at the pumps
every day. You must know that in a settled and civilized ocean like our
Atlantic, for example, some skippers think little of pumping their
whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy night, should the
officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that respect, the
probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again
remember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom.
Nor in the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward,
gentlemen, is it altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their
pump-handles in full chorus even for a voyage of considerable length;
that is, if it lie along a tolerably accessible coast, or if any other
reasonable retreat is afforded them. It is only when a leaky vessel is
in some very out of the way part of those waters, some really landless
latitude, that her captain begins to feel a little anxious.

“Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was found
gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern manifested by
several of her company; especially by Radney the mate. He commanded the
upper sails to be well hoisted, sheeted home anew, and every way
expanded to the breeze. Now this Radney, I suppose, was as little of a
coward, and as little inclined to any sort of nervous apprehensiveness
touching his own person as any fearless, unthinking creature on land or
on sea that you can conveniently imagine, gentlemen. Therefore when he
betrayed this solicitude about the safety of the ship, some of the
seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a part owner
in her. So when they were working that evening at the pumps, there was
on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them, as they
stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear
water; clear as any mountain spring, gentlemen—that bubbling from the
pumps ran across the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at
the lee scupper-holes.

“Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this conventional
world of ours—watery or otherwise; that when a person placed in command
over his fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his
superior in general pride of manhood, straightway against that man he
conceives an unconquerable dislike and bitterness; and if he have a
chance he will pull down and pulverize that subaltern’s tower, and make
a little heap of dust of it. Be this conceit of mine as it may,
gentlemen, at all events Steelkilt was a tall and noble animal with a
head like a Roman, and a flowing golden beard like the tasseled
housings of your last viceroy’s snorting charger; and a brain, and a
heart, and a soul in him, gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt
Charlemagne, had he been born son to Charlemagne’s father. But Radney,
the mate, was ugly as a mule; yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious.
He did not love Steelkilt, and Steelkilt knew it.

“Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the
rest, the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on with
his gay banterings.

“‘Aye, aye, my merry lads, it’s a lively leak this; hold a cannikin,
one of ye, and let’s have a taste. By the Lord, it’s worth bottling! I
tell ye what, men, old Rad’s investment must go for it! he had best cut
away his part of the hull and tow it home. The fact is, boys, that
sword-fish only began the job; he’s come back again with a gang of
ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish, and what not; and the whole
posse of ’em are now hard at work cutting and slashing at the bottom;
making improvements, I suppose. If old Rad were here now, I’d tell him
to jump overboard and scatter ’em. They’re playing the devil with his
estate, I can tell him. But he’s a simple old soul,—Rad, and a beauty
too. Boys, they say the rest of his property is invested in
looking-glasses. I wonder if he’d give a poor devil like me the model
of his nose.’

“‘Damn your eyes! what’s that pump stopping for?’ roared Radney,
pretending not to have heard the sailors’ talk. ‘Thunder away at it!’

“‘Aye, aye, sir,’ said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket. ‘Lively, boys,
lively, now!’ And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines;
the men tossed their hats off to it, and ere long that peculiar gasping
of the lungs was heard which denotes the fullest tension of life’s
utmost energies.

“Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman went
forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his face
fiery red, his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from his
brow. Now what cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed Radney
to meddle with such a man in that corporeally exasperated state, I know
not; but so it happened. Intolerably striding along the deck, the mate
commanded him to get a broom and sweep down the planks, and also a
shovel, and remove some offensive matters consequent upon allowing a
pig to run at large.

“Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship’s deck at sea is a piece of household
work which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every
evening; it has been known to be done in the case of ships actually
foundering at the time. Such, gentlemen, is the inflexibility of
sea-usages and the instinctive love of neatness in seamen; some of whom
would not willingly drown without first washing their faces. But in all
vessels this broom business is the prescriptive province of the boys,
if boys there be aboard. Besides, it was the stronger men in the
Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs, taking turns at the pumps;
and being the most athletic seaman of them all, Steelkilt had been
regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs; consequently he should
have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly
nautical duties, such being the case with his comrades. I mention all
these particulars so that you may understand exactly how this affair
stood between the two men.

“But there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almost as
plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney had spat
in his face. Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will
understand this; and all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman
fully comprehended when the mate uttered his command. But as he sat
still for a moment, and as he steadfastly looked into the mate’s
malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks heaped up in him
and the slow-match silently burning along towards them; as he
instinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and unwillingness
to stir up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being—a
repugnance most felt, when felt at all, by really valiant men even when
aggrieved—this nameless phantom feeling, gentlemen, stole over
Steelkilt.

“Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily
exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that sweeping
the deck was not his business, and he would not do it. And then,
without at all alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three lads as the
customary sweepers; who, not being billeted at the pumps, had done
little or nothing all day. To this, Radney replied with an oath, in a
most domineering and outrageous manner unconditionally reiterating his
command; meanwhile advancing upon the still seated Lakeman, with an
uplifted cooper’s club hammer which he had snatched from a cask near
by.

“Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps, for
all his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt
could but ill brook this bearing in the mate; but somehow still
smothering the conflagration within him, without speaking he remained
doggedly rooted to his seat, till at last the incensed Radney shook the
hammer within a few inches of his face, furiously commanding him to do
his bidding.

“Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadily
followed by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated
his intention not to obey. Seeing, however, that his forbearance had
not the slightest effect, by an awful and unspeakable intimation with
his twisted hand he warned off the foolish and infatuated man; but it
was to no purpose. And in this way the two went once slowly round the
windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to retreat, bethinking him
that he had now forborne as much as comported with his humor, the
Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:

“‘Mr. Radney, I will not obey you. Take that hammer away, or look to
yourself.’ But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him, where
the Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of
his teeth; meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions.
Retreating not the thousandth part of an inch; stabbing him in the eye
with the unflinching poniard of his glance, Steelkilt, clenching his
right hand behind him and creepingly drawing it back, told his
persecutor that if the hammer but grazed his cheek he (Steelkilt) would
murder him. But, gentlemen, the fool had been branded for the slaughter
by the gods. Immediately the hammer touched the cheek; the next instant
the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head; he fell on the hatch
spouting blood like a whale.

“Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays
leading far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing their
mastheads. They were both Canallers.

“‘Canallers!’ cried Don Pedro. ‘We have seen many whale-ships in our
harbours, but never heard of your Canallers. Pardon: who and what are
they?’

“‘Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal.
You must have heard of it.’

“‘Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and hereditary
land, we know but little of your vigorous North.’

“‘Aye? Well then, Don, refill my cup. Your chicha’s very fine; and ere
proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are; for such
information may throw side-light upon my story.’

“For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire
breadth of the state of New York; through numerous populous cities and
most thriving villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps, and
affluent, cultivated fields, unrivalled for fertility; by billiard-room
and bar-room; through the holy-of-holies of great forests; on Roman
arches over Indian rivers; through sun and shade; by happy hearts or
broken; through all the wide contrasting scenery of those noble Mohawk
counties; and especially, by rows of snow-white chapels, whose spires
stand almost like milestones, flows one continual stream of Venetianly
corrupt and often lawless life. There’s your true Ashantee, gentlemen;
there howl your pagans; where you ever find them, next door to you;
under the long-flung shadow, and the snug patronising lee of churches.
For by some curious fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan
freebooters that they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so
sinners, gentlemen, most abound in holiest vicinities.

“‘Is that a friar passing?’ said Don Pedro, looking downwards into the
crowded plazza, with humorous concern.

“‘Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella’s Inquisition wanes in
Lima,’ laughed Don Sebastian. ‘Proceed, Senor.’

“‘A moment! Pardon!’ cried another of the company. ‘In the name of all
us Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that we have by
no means overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for
distant Venice in your corrupt comparison. Oh! do not bow and look
surprised; you know the proverb all along this coast—“Corrupt as Lima.”
It but bears out your saying, too; churches more plentiful than
billiard-tables, and for ever open—and “Corrupt as Lima.” So, too,
Venice; I have been there; the holy city of the blessed evangelist, St.
Mark!—St. Dominic, purge it! Your cup! Thanks: here I refill; now, you
pour out again.’

“Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller would
make a fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is
he. Like Mark Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed, flowery
Nile, he indolently floats, openly toying with his red-cheeked
Cleopatra, ripening his apricot thigh upon the sunny deck. But ashore,
all this effeminacy is dashed. The brigandish guise which the Canaller
so proudly sports; his slouched and gaily-ribboned hat betoken his
grand features. A terror to the smiling innocence of the villages
through which he floats; his swart visage and bold swagger are not
unshunned in cities. Once a vagabond on his own canal, I have received
good turns from one of these Canallers; I thank him heartily; would
fain be not ungrateful; but it is often one of the prime redeeming
qualities of your man of violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm
to back a poor stranger in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one. In
sum, gentlemen, what the wildness of this canal life is, is
emphatically evinced by this; that our wild whale-fishery contains so
many of its most finished graduates, and that scarce any race of
mankind, except Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling
captains. Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter,
that to many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its
line, the probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole
transition between quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and
recklessly ploughing the waters of the most barbaric seas.

“‘I see! I see!’ impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his chicha
upon his silvery ruffles. ‘No need to travel! The world’s one Lima. I
had thought, now, that at your temperate North the generations were
cold and holy as the hills.—But the story.’

“I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay. Hardly
had he done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and
the four harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck. But sliding down
the ropes like baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed into the
uproar, and sought to drag their man out of it towards the forecastle.
Others of the sailors joined with them in this attempt, and a twisted
turmoil ensued; while standing out of harm’s way, the valiant captain
danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling upon his officers to
manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke him along to the
quarter-deck. At intervals, he ran close up to the revolving border of
the confusion, and prying into the heart of it with his pike, sought to
prick out the object of his resentment. But Steelkilt and his
desperadoes were too much for them all; they succeeded in gaining the
forecastle deck, where, hastily slewing about three or four large casks
in a line with the windlass, these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves
behind the barricade.

“‘Come out of that, ye pirates!’ roared the captain, now menacing them
with a pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward. ‘Come
out of that, ye cut-throats!’

“Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there,
defied the worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain to
understand distinctly, that his (Steelkilt’s) death would be the signal
for a murderous mutiny on the part of all hands. Fearing in his heart
lest this might prove but too true, the captain a little desisted, but
still commanded the insurgents instantly to return to their duty.

“‘Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?’ demanded their
ringleader.

“‘Turn to! turn to!—I make no promise;—to your duty! Do you want to
sink the ship, by knocking off at a time like this? Turn to!’ and he
once more raised a pistol.

“‘Sink the ship?’ cried Steelkilt. ‘Aye, let her sink. Not a man of us
turns to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us. What
say ye, men?’ turning to his comrades. A fierce cheer was their
response.

“The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping his eye
on the Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:—‘It’s not our
fault; we didn’t want it; I told him to take his hammer away; it was
boy’s business; he might have known me before this; I told him not to
prick the buffalo; I believe I have broken a finger here against his
cursed jaw; ain’t those mincing knives down in the forecastle there,
men? look to those handspikes, my hearties. Captain, by God, look to
yourself; say the word; don’t be a fool; forget it all; we are ready to
turn to; treat us decently, and we’re your men; but we won’t be
flogged.’

“‘Turn to! I make no promises, turn to, I say!’

“‘Look ye, now,’ cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him,
‘there are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped for
the cruise, d’ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our
discharge as soon as the anchor is down; so we don’t want a row; it’s
not our interest; we want to be peaceable; we are ready to work, but we
won’t be flogged.’

“‘Turn to!’ roared the Captain.

“Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:—‘I tell you what
it is now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a shabby
rascal, we won’t lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us; but till
you say the word about not flogging us, we don’t do a hand’s turn.’

“‘Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I’ll keep ye there till
ye’re sick of it. Down ye go.’

“‘Shall we?’ cried the ringleader to his men. Most of them were against
it; but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded him down
into their dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears into a cave.

“As the Lakeman’s bare head was just level with the planks, the Captain
and his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over the slide
of the scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and loudly called
for the steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the
companionway. Then opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered
something down the crack, closed it, and turned the key upon them—ten
in number—leaving on deck some twenty or more, who thus far had
remained neutral.

“All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward and
aft, especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway; at
which last place it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after
breaking through the bulkhead below. But the hours of darkness passed
in peace; the men who still remained at their duty toiling hard at the
pumps, whose clinking and clanking at intervals through the dreary
night dismally resounded through the ship.

“At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck,
summoned the prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused. Water was
then lowered down to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were
tossed after it; when again turning the key upon them and pocketing it,
the Captain returned to the quarter-deck. Twice every day for three
days this was repeated; but on the fourth morning a confused wrangling,
and then a scuffling was heard, as the customary summons was delivered;
and suddenly four men burst up from the forecastle, saying they were
ready to turn to. The fetid closeness of the air, and a famishing diet,
united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution, had constrained
them to surrender at discretion. Emboldened by this, the Captain
reiterated his demand to the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a
terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he
belonged. On the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up
into the air from the desperate arms below that sought to restrain
them. Only three were left.

“‘Better turn to, now?’ said the Captain with a heartless jeer.

“‘Shut us up again, will ye!’ cried Steelkilt.

“‘Oh certainly,’ said the Captain, and the key clicked.

“It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection of
seven of his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that had
last hailed him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place as
black as the bowels of despair; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to
the two Canallers, thus far apparently of one mind with him, to burst
out of their hole at the next summoning of the garrison; and armed with
their keen mincing knives (long, crescentic, heavy implements with a
handle at each end) run amuck from the bowsprit to the taffrail; and if
by any devilishness of desperation possible, seize the ship. For
himself, he would do this, he said, whether they joined him or not.
That was the last night he should spend in that den. But the scheme met
with no opposition on the part of the other two; they swore they were
ready for that, or for any other mad thing, for anything in short but a
surrender. And what was more, they each insisted upon being the first
man on deck, when the time to make the rush should come. But to this
their leader as fiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself;
particularly as his two comrades would not yield, the one to the other,
in the matter; and both of them could not be first, for the ladder
would but admit one man at a time. And here, gentlemen, the foul play
of these miscreants must come out.

“Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own
separate soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same piece
of treachery, namely: to be foremost in breaking out, in order to be
the first of the three, though the last of the ten, to surrender; and
thereby secure whatever small chance of pardon such conduct might
merit. But when Steelkilt made known his determination still to lead
them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle chemistry of
villany, mixed their before secret treacheries together; and when their
leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls to each other in
three sentences; and bound the sleeper with cords, and gagged him with
cords; and shrieked out for the Captain at midnight.

“Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he
and all his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle. In a
few minutes the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot, the still
struggling ringleader was shoved up into the air by his perfidious
allies, who at once claimed the honor of securing a man who had been
fully ripe for murder. But all these were collared, and dragged along
the deck like dead cattle; and, side by side, were seized up into the
mizzen rigging, like three quarters of meat, and there they hung till
morning. ‘Damn ye,’ cried the Captain, pacing to and fro before them,
‘the vultures would not touch ye, ye villains!’

“At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who had
rebelled from those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the
former that he had a good mind to flog them all round—thought, upon the
whole, he would do so—he ought to—justice demanded it; but for the
present, considering their timely surrender, he would let them go with
a reprimand, which he accordingly administered in the vernacular.

“‘But as for you, ye carrion rogues,’ turning to the three men in the
rigging—‘for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;’ and, seizing
a rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of the two
traitors, till they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their heads
sideways, as the two crucified thieves are drawn.

“‘My wrist is sprained with ye!’ he cried, at last; ‘but there is still
rope enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn’t give up. Take
that gag from his mouth, and let us hear what he can say for himself.’

“For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of his
cramped jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a
sort of hiss, ‘What I say is this—and mind it well—if you flog me, I
murder you!’

“‘Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me’—and the Captain drew off with
the rope to strike.

“‘Best not,’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘But I must,’—and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.

“Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the Captain;
who, to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the deck
rapidly two or three times, and then suddenly throwing down his rope,
said, ‘I won’t do it—let him go—cut him down: d’ye hear?’

“But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale
man, with a bandaged head, arrested them—Radney the chief mate. Ever
since the blow, he had lain in his berth; but that morning, hearing the
tumult on the deck, he had crept out, and thus far had watched the
whole scene. Such was the state of his mouth, that he could hardly
speak; but mumbling something about _his_ being willing and able to do
what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched the rope and advanced
to his pinioned foe.

“‘You are a coward!’ hissed the Lakeman.

“‘So I am, but take that.’ The mate was in the very act of striking,
when another hiss stayed his uplifted arm. He paused: and then pausing
no more, made good his word, spite of Steelkilt’s threat, whatever that
might have been. The three men were then cut down, all hands were
turned to, and, sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the iron pumps
clanged as before.

“Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamor
was heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors running up,
besieged the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the crew.
Entreaties, cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at their own
instance they were put down in the ship’s run for salvation. Still, no
sign of mutiny reappeared among the rest. On the contrary, it seemed,
that mainly at Steelkilt’s instigation, they had resolved to maintain
the strictest peacefulness, obey all orders to the last, and, when the
ship reached port, desert her in a body. But in order to insure the
speediest end to the voyage, they all agreed to another thing—namely,
not to sing out for whales, in case any should be discovered. For,
spite of her leak, and spite of all her other perils, the Town-Ho still
maintained her mast-heads, and her captain was just as willing to lower
for a fish that moment, as on the day his craft first struck the
cruising ground; and Radney the mate was quite as ready to change his
berth for a boat, and with his bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the
vital jaw of the whale.

“But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of
passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till
all was over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the
man who had stung him in the ventricles of his heart. He was in Radney
the chief mate’s watch; and as if the infatuated man sought to run more
than half way to meet his doom, after the scene at the rigging, he
insisted, against the express counsel of the captain, upon resuming the
head of his watch at night. Upon this, and one or two other
circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of his revenge.

“During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the
bulwarks of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of
the boat which was hoisted up there, a little above the ship’s side. In
this attitude, it was well known, he sometimes dozed. There was a
considerable vacancy between the boat and the ship, and down between
this was the sea. Steelkilt calculated his time, and found that his
next trick at the helm would come round at two o’clock, in the morning
of the third day from that in which he had been betrayed. At his
leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something very carefully
in his watches below.

“‘What are you making there?’ said a shipmate.

“‘What do you think? what does it look like?’

“‘Like a lanyard for your bag; but it’s an odd one, seems to me.’

“‘Yes, rather oddish,’ said the Lakeman, holding it at arm’s length
before him; ‘but I think it will answer. Shipmate, I haven’t enough
twine,—have you any?’

“But there was none in the forecastle.

“‘Then I must get some from old Rad;’ and he rose to go aft.

“‘You don’t mean to go a begging to _him!_’ said a sailor.

“‘Why not? Do you think he won’t do me a turn, when it’s to help
himself in the end, shipmate?’ and going to the mate, he looked at him
quietly, and asked him for some twine to mend his hammock. It was given
him—neither twine nor lanyard were seen again; but the next night an
iron ball, closely netted, partly rolled from the pocket of the
Lakeman’s monkey jacket, as he was tucking the coat into his hammock
for a pillow. Twenty-four hours after, his trick at the silent
helm—nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave always ready
dug to the seaman’s hand—that fatal hour was then to come; and in the
fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was already stark and
stretched as a corpse, with his forehead crushed in.

“But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloody
deed he had planned. Yet complete revenge he had, and without being the
avenger. For by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to step in
to take out of his hands into its own the damning thing he would have
done.

“It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the second
day, when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid Teneriffe
man, drawing water in the main-chains, all at once shouted out, ‘There
she rolls! there she rolls!’ Jesu, what a whale! It was Moby Dick.

“‘Moby Dick!’ cried Don Sebastian; ‘St. Dominic! Sir sailor, but do
whales have christenings? Whom call you Moby Dick?’

“‘A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster, Don;—but
that would be too long a story.’

“‘How? how?’ cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.

“‘Nay, Dons, Dons—nay, nay! I cannot rehearse that now. Let me get more
into the air, Sirs.’

“‘The chicha! the chicha!’ cried Don Pedro; ‘our vigorous friend looks
faint;—fill up his empty glass!’

“No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.—Now, gentlemen, so
suddenly perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the
ship—forgetful of the compact among the crew—in the excitement of the
moment, the Teneriffe man had instinctively and involuntarily lifted
his voice for the monster, though for some little time past it had been
plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-heads. All was now a phrensy.
‘The White Whale—the White Whale!’ was the cry from captain, mates, and
harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours, were all anxious to
capture so famous and precious a fish; while the dogged crew eyed
askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty of the vast milky mass,
that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun, shifted and glistened like a
living opal in the blue morning sea. Gentlemen, a strange fatality
pervades the whole career of these events, as if verily mapped out
before the world itself was charted. The mutineer was the bowsman of
the mate, and when fast to a fish, it was his duty to sit next him,
while Radney stood up with his lance in the prow, and haul in or
slacken the line, at the word of command. Moreover, when the four boats
were lowered, the mate’s got the start; and none howled more fiercely
with delight than did Steelkilt, as he strained at his oar. After a
stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast, and, spear in hand, Radney
sprang to the bow. He was always a furious man, it seems, in a boat.
And now his bandaged cry was, to beach him on the whale’s topmost back.
Nothing loath, his bowsman hauled him up and up, through a blinding
foam that blent two whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat
struck as against a sunken ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the
standing mate. That instant, as he fell on the whale’s slippery back,
the boat righted, and was dashed aside by the swell, while Radney was
tossed over into the sea, on the other flank of the whale. He struck
out through the spray, and, for an instant, was dimly seen through that
veil, wildly seeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby Dick. But
the whale rushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer
between his jaws; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again,
and went down.

“Meantime, at the first tap of the boat’s bottom, the Lakeman had
slackened the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmly
looking on, he thought his own thoughts. But a sudden, terrific,
downward jerking of the boat, quickly brought his knife to the line. He
cut it; and the whale was free. But, at some distance, Moby Dick rose
again, with some tatters of Radney’s red woollen shirt, caught in the
teeth that had destroyed him. All four boats gave chase again; but the
whale eluded them, and finally wholly disappeared.

“In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port—a savage, solitary
place—where no civilized creature resided. There, headed by the
Lakeman, all but five or six of the foremastmen deliberately deserted
among the palms; eventually, as it turned out, seizing a large double
war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail for some other harbor.

“The ship’s company being reduced to but a handful, the captain called
upon the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of heaving
down the ship to stop the leak. But to such unresting vigilance over
their dangerous allies was this small band of whites necessitated, both
by night and by day, and so extreme was the hard work they underwent,
that upon the vessel being ready again for sea, they were in such a
weakened condition that the captain durst not put off with them in so
heavy a vessel. After taking counsel with his officers, he anchored the
ship as far off shore as possible; loaded and ran out his two cannon
from the bows; stacked his muskets on the poop; and warning the
Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril, took one man with
him, and setting the sail of his best whale-boat, steered straight
before the wind for Tahiti, five hundred miles distant, to procure a
reinforcement to his crew.

“On the fourth day of the sail, a large canoe was descried, which
seemed to have touched at a low isle of corals. He steered away from
it; but the savage craft bore down on him; and soon the voice of
Steelkilt hailed him to heave to, or he would run him under water. The
captain presented a pistol. With one foot on each prow of the yoked
war-canoes, the Lakeman laughed him to scorn; assuring him that if the
pistol so much as clicked in the lock, he would bury him in bubbles and
foam.

“‘What do you want of me?’ cried the captain.

“‘Where are you bound? and for what are you bound?’ demanded Steelkilt;
‘no lies.’

“‘I am bound to Tahiti for more men.’

“‘Very good. Let me board you a moment—I come in peace.’ With that he
leaped from the canoe, swam to the boat; and climbing the gunwale,
stood face to face with the captain.

“‘Cross your arms, sir; throw back your head. Now, repeat after me. As
soon as Steelkilt leaves me, I swear to beach this boat on yonder
island, and remain there six days. If I do not, may lightnings strike
me!’

“‘A pretty scholar,’ laughed the Lakeman. ‘Adios, Senor!’ and leaping
into the sea, he swam back to his comrades.

“Watching the boat till it was fairly beached, and drawn up to the
roots of the cocoa-nut trees, Steelkilt made sail again, and in due
time arrived at Tahiti, his own place of destination. There, luck
befriended him; two ships were about to sail for France, and were
providentially in want of precisely that number of men which the sailor
headed. They embarked; and so for ever got the start of their former
captain, had he been at all minded to work them legal retribution.

“Some ten days after the French ships sailed, the whale-boat arrived,
and the captain was forced to enlist some of the more civilized
Tahitians, who had been somewhat used to the sea. Chartering a small
native schooner, he returned with them to his vessel; and finding all
right there, again resumed his cruisings.

“Where Steelkilt now is, gentlemen, none know; but upon the island of
Nantucket, the widow of Radney still turns to the sea which refuses to
give up its dead; still in dreams sees the awful white whale that
destroyed him.  * * * *

“‘Are you through?’ said Don Sebastian, quietly.

“‘I am, Don.’

“‘Then I entreat you, tell me if to the best of your own convictions,
this your story is in substance really true? It is so passing
wonderful! Did you get it from an unquestionable source? Bear with me
if I seem to press.’

“‘Also bear with all of us, sir sailor; for we all join in Don
Sebastian’s suit,’ cried the company, with exceeding interest.

“‘Is there a copy of the Holy Evangelists in the Golden Inn,
gentlemen?’

“‘Nay,’ said Don Sebastian; ‘but I know a worthy priest near by, who
will quickly procure one for me. I go for it; but are you well advised?
this may grow too serious.’

“‘Will you be so good as to bring the priest also, Don?’

“‘Though there are no Auto-da-Fés in Lima now,’ said one of the company
to another; ‘I fear our sailor friend runs risk of the archiepiscopacy.
Let us withdraw more out of the moonlight. I see no need of this.’

“‘Excuse me for running after you, Don Sebastian; but may I also beg
that you will be particular in procuring the largest sized Evangelists
you can.’

* * * * * *

“‘This is the priest, he brings you the Evangelists,’ said Don
Sebastian, gravely, returning with a tall and solemn figure.

“‘Let me remove my hat. Now, venerable priest, further into the light,
and hold the Holy Book before me that I may touch it.

“‘So help me Heaven, and on my honor the story I have told ye,
gentlemen, is in substance and its great items, true. I know it to be
true; it happened on this ball; I trod the ship; I knew the crew; I
have seen and talked with Steelkilt since the death of Radney.’”


CHAPTER 55. Of the Monstrous Pictures of Whales.

I shall ere long paint to you as well as one can without canvas,
something like the true form of the whale as he actually appears to the
eye of the whaleman when in his own absolute body the whale is moored
alongside the whale-ship so that he can be fairly stepped upon there.
It may be worth while, therefore, previously to advert to those curious
imaginary portraits of him which even down to the present day
confidently challenge the faith of the landsman. It is time to set the
world right in this matter, by proving such pictures of the whale all
wrong.

It may be that the primal source of all those pictorial delusions will
be found among the oldest Hindoo, Egyptian, and Grecian sculptures. For
ever since those inventive but unscrupulous times when on the marble
panellings of temples, the pedestals of statues, and on shields,
medallions, cups, and coins, the dolphin was drawn in scales of
chain-armor like Saladin’s, and a helmeted head like St. George’s; ever
since then has something of the same sort of license prevailed, not
only in most popular pictures of the whale, but in many scientific
presentations of him.

Now, by all odds, the most ancient extant portrait anyways purporting
to be the whale’s, is to be found in the famous cavern-pagoda of
Elephanta, in India. The Brahmins maintain that in the almost endless
sculptures of that immemorial pagoda, all the trades and pursuits,
every conceivable avocation of man, were prefigured ages before any of
them actually came into being. No wonder then, that in some sort our
noble profession of whaling should have been there shadowed forth. The
Hindoo whale referred to, occurs in a separate department of the wall,
depicting the incarnation of Vishnu in the form of leviathan, learnedly
known as the Matse Avatar. But though this sculpture is half man and
half whale, so as only to give the tail of the latter, yet that small
section of him is all wrong. It looks more like the tapering tail of an
anaconda, than the broad palms of the true whale’s majestic flukes.

But go to the old Galleries, and look now at a great Christian
painter’s portrait of this fish; for he succeeds no better than the
antediluvian Hindoo. It is Guido’s picture of Perseus rescuing
Andromeda from the sea-monster or whale. Where did Guido get the model
of such a strange creature as that? Nor does Hogarth, in painting the
same scene in his own “Perseus Descending,” make out one whit better.
The huge corpulence of that Hogarthian monster undulates on the
surface, scarcely drawing one inch of water. It has a sort of howdah on
its back, and its distended tusked mouth into which the billows are
rolling, might be taken for the Traitors’ Gate leading from the Thames
by water into the Tower. Then, there are the Prodromus whales of old
Scotch Sibbald, and Jonah’s whale, as depicted in the prints of old
Bibles and the cuts of old primers. What shall be said of these? As for
the book-binder’s whale winding like a vine-stalk round the stock of a
descending anchor—as stamped and gilded on the backs and title-pages of
many books both old and new—that is a very picturesque but purely
fabulous creature, imitated, I take it, from the like figures on
antique vases. Though universally denominated a dolphin, I nevertheless
call this book-binder’s fish an attempt at a whale; because it was so
intended when the device was first introduced. It was introduced by an
old Italian publisher somewhere about the 15th century, during the
Revival of Learning; and in those days, and even down to a
comparatively late period, dolphins were popularly supposed to be a
species of the Leviathan.

In the vignettes and other embellishments of some ancient books you
will at times meet with very curious touches at the whale, where all
manner of spouts, jets d’eau, hot springs and cold, Saratoga and
Baden-Baden, come bubbling up from his unexhausted brain. In the
title-page of the original edition of the “Advancement of Learning” you
will find some curious whales.

But quitting all these unprofessional attempts, let us glance at those
pictures of leviathan purporting to be sober, scientific delineations,
by those who know. In old Harris’s collection of voyages there are some
plates of whales extracted from a Dutch book of voyages, A.D. 1671,
entitled “A Whaling Voyage to Spitzbergen in the ship Jonas in the
Whale, Peter Peterson of Friesland, master.” In one of those plates the
whales, like great rafts of logs, are represented lying among
ice-isles, with white bears running over their living backs. In another
plate, the prodigious blunder is made of representing the whale with
perpendicular flukes.

Then again, there is an imposing quarto, written by one Captain
Colnett, a Post Captain in the English navy, entitled “A Voyage round
Cape Horn into the South Seas, for the purpose of extending the
Spermaceti Whale Fisheries.” In this book is an outline purporting to
be a “Picture of a Physeter or Spermaceti whale, drawn by scale from
one killed on the coast of Mexico, August, 1793, and hoisted on deck.”
I doubt not the captain had this veracious picture taken for the
benefit of his marines. To mention but one thing about it, let me say
that it has an eye which applied, according to the accompanying scale,
to a full grown sperm whale, would make the eye of that whale a
bow-window some five feet long. Ah, my gallant captain, why did ye not
give us Jonah looking out of that eye!

Nor are the most conscientious compilations of Natural History for the
benefit of the young and tender, free from the same heinousness of
mistake. Look at that popular work “Goldsmith’s Animated Nature.” In
the abridged London edition of 1807, there are plates of an alleged
“whale” and a “narwhale.” I do not wish to seem inelegant, but this
unsightly whale looks much like an amputated sow; and, as for the
narwhale, one glimpse at it is enough to amaze one, that in this
nineteenth century such a hippogriff could be palmed for genuine upon
any intelligent public of schoolboys.

Then, again, in 1825, Bernard Germain, Count de Lacépède, a great
naturalist, published a scientific systemized whale book, wherein are
several pictures of the different species of the Leviathan. All these
are not only incorrect, but the picture of the Mysticetus or Greenland
whale (that is to say, the Right whale), even Scoresby, a long
experienced man as touching that species, declares not to have its
counterpart in nature.

But the placing of the cap-sheaf to all this blundering business was
reserved for the scientific Frederick Cuvier, brother to the famous
Baron. In 1836, he published a Natural History of Whales, in which he
gives what he calls a picture of the Sperm Whale. Before showing that
picture to any Nantucketer, you had best provide for your summary
retreat from Nantucket. In a word, Frederick Cuvier’s Sperm Whale is
not a Sperm Whale, but a squash. Of course, he never had the benefit of
a whaling voyage (such men seldom have), but whence he derived that
picture, who can tell? Perhaps he got it as his scientific predecessor
in the same field, Desmarest, got one of his authentic abortions; that
is, from a Chinese drawing. And what sort of lively lads with the
pencil those Chinese are, many queer cups and saucers inform us.

As for the sign-painters’ whales seen in the streets hanging over the
shops of oil-dealers, what shall be said of them? They are generally
Richard III. whales, with dromedary humps, and very savage;
breakfasting on three or four sailor tarts, that is whaleboats full of
mariners: their deformities floundering in seas of blood and blue
paint.

But these manifold mistakes in depicting the whale are not so very
surprising after all. Consider! Most of the scientific drawings have
been taken from the stranded fish; and these are about as correct as a
drawing of a wrecked ship, with broken back, would correctly represent
the noble animal itself in all its undashed pride of hull and spars.
Though elephants have stood for their full-lengths, the living
Leviathan has never yet fairly floated himself for his portrait. The
living whale, in his full majesty and significance, is only to be seen
at sea in unfathomable waters; and afloat the vast bulk of him is out
of sight, like a launched line-of-battle ship; and out of that element
it is a thing eternally impossible for mortal man to hoist him bodily
into the air, so as to preserve all his mighty swells and undulations.
And, not to speak of the highly presumable difference of contour
between a young sucking whale and a full-grown Platonian Leviathan;
yet, even in the case of one of those young sucking whales hoisted to a
ship’s deck, such is then the outlandish, eel-like, limbered, varying
shape of him, that his precise expression the devil himself could not
catch.

But it may be fancied, that from the naked skeleton of the stranded
whale, accurate hints may be derived touching his true form. Not at
all. For it is one of the more curious things about this Leviathan,
that his skeleton gives very little idea of his general shape. Though
Jeremy Bentham’s skeleton, which hangs for candelabra in the library of
one of his executors, correctly conveys the idea of a burly-browed
utilitarian old gentleman, with all Jeremy’s other leading personal
characteristics; yet nothing of this kind could be inferred from any
leviathan’s articulated bones. In fact, as the great Hunter says, the
mere skeleton of the whale bears the same relation to the fully
invested and padded animal as the insect does to the chrysalis that so
roundingly envelopes it. This peculiarity is strikingly evinced in the
head, as in some part of this book will be incidentally shown. It is
also very curiously displayed in the side fin, the bones of which
almost exactly answer to the bones of the human hand, minus only the
thumb. This fin has four regular bone-fingers, the index, middle, ring,
and little finger. But all these are permanently lodged in their fleshy
covering, as the human fingers in an artificial covering. “However
recklessly the whale may sometimes serve us,” said humorous Stubb one
day, “he can never be truly said to handle us without mittens.”

For all these reasons, then, any way you may look at it, you must needs
conclude that the great Leviathan is that one creature in the world
which must remain unpainted to the last. True, one portrait may hit the
mark much nearer than another, but none can hit it with any very
considerable degree of exactness. So there is no earthly way of finding
out precisely what the whale really looks like. And the only mode in
which you can derive even a tolerable idea of his living contour, is by
going a whaling yourself; but by so doing, you run no small risk of
being eternally stove and sunk by him. Wherefore, it seems to me you
had best not be too fastidious in your curiosity touching this
Leviathan.


CHAPTER 56. Of the Less Erroneous Pictures of Whales, and the True
Pictures of Whaling Scenes.

In connexion with the monstrous pictures of whales, I am strongly
tempted here to enter upon those still more monstrous stories of them
which are to be found in certain books, both ancient and modern,
especially in Pliny, Purchas, Hackluyt, Harris, Cuvier, etc. But I pass
that matter by.

I know of only four published outlines of the great Sperm Whale;
Colnett’s, Huggins’s, Frederick Cuvier’s, and Beale’s. In the previous
chapter Colnett and Cuvier have been referred to. Huggins’s is far
better than theirs; but, by great odds, Beale’s is the best. All
Beale’s drawings of this whale are good, excepting the middle figure in
the picture of three whales in various attitudes, capping his second
chapter. His frontispiece, boats attacking Sperm Whales, though no
doubt calculated to excite the civil scepticism of some parlor men, is
admirably correct and life-like in its general effect. Some of the
Sperm Whale drawings in J. Ross Browne are pretty correct in contour;
but they are wretchedly engraved. That is not his fault though.

Of the Right Whale, the best outline pictures are in Scoresby; but they
are drawn on too small a scale to convey a desirable impression. He has
but one picture of whaling scenes, and this is a sad deficiency,
because it is by such pictures only, when at all well done, that you
can derive anything like a truthful idea of the living whale as seen by
his living hunters.

But, taken for all in all, by far the finest, though in some details
not the most correct, presentations of whales and whaling scenes to be
anywhere found, are two large French engravings, well executed, and
taken from paintings by one Garnery. Respectively, they represent
attacks on the Sperm and Right Whale. In the first engraving a noble
Sperm Whale is depicted in full majesty of might, just risen beneath
the boat from the profundities of the ocean, and bearing high in the
air upon his back the terrific wreck of the stoven planks. The prow of
the boat is partially unbroken, and is drawn just balancing upon the
monster’s spine; and standing in that prow, for that one single
incomputable flash of time, you behold an oarsman, half shrouded by the
incensed boiling spout of the whale, and in the act of leaping, as if
from a precipice. The action of the whole thing is wonderfully good and
true. The half-emptied line-tub floats on the whitened sea; the wooden
poles of the spilled harpoons obliquely bob in it; the heads of the
swimming crew are scattered about the whale in contrasting expressions
of affright; while in the black stormy distance the ship is bearing
down upon the scene. Serious fault might be found with the anatomical
details of this whale, but let that pass; since, for the life of me, I
could not draw so good a one.

In the second engraving, the boat is in the act of drawing alongside
the barnacled flank of a large running Right Whale, that rolls his
black weedy bulk in the sea like some mossy rock-slide from the
Patagonian cliffs. His jets are erect, full, and black like soot; so
that from so abounding a smoke in the chimney, you would think there
must be a brave supper cooking in the great bowels below. Sea fowls are
pecking at the small crabs, shell-fish, and other sea candies and
maccaroni, which the Right Whale sometimes carries on his pestilent
back. And all the while the thick-lipped leviathan is rushing through
the deep, leaving tons of tumultuous white curds in his wake, and
causing the slight boat to rock in the swells like a skiff caught nigh
the paddle-wheels of an ocean steamer. Thus, the foreground is all
raging commotion; but behind, in admirable artistic contrast, is the
glassy level of a sea becalmed, the drooping unstarched sails of the
powerless ship, and the inert mass of a dead whale, a conquered
fortress, with the flag of capture lazily hanging from the whale-pole
inserted into his spout-hole.

Who Garnery the painter is, or was, I know not. But my life for it he
was either practically conversant with his subject, or else
marvellously tutored by some experienced whaleman. The French are the
lads for painting action. Go and gaze upon all the paintings of Europe,
and where will you find such a gallery of living and breathing
commotion on canvas, as in that triumphal hall at Versailles; where the
beholder fights his way, pell-mell, through the consecutive great
battles of France; where every sword seems a flash of the Northern
Lights, and the successive armed kings and Emperors dash by, like a
charge of crowned centaurs? Not wholly unworthy of a place in that
gallery, are these sea battle-pieces of Garnery.

The natural aptitude of the French for seizing the picturesqueness of
things seems to be peculiarly evinced in what paintings and engravings
they have of their whaling scenes. With not one tenth of England’s
experience in the fishery, and not the thousandth part of that of the
Americans, they have nevertheless furnished both nations with the only
finished sketches at all capable of conveying the real spirit of the
whale hunt. For the most part, the English and American whale
draughtsmen seem entirely content with presenting the mechanical
outline of things, such as the vacant profile of the whale; which, so
far as picturesqueness of effect is concerned, is about tantamount to
sketching the profile of a pyramid. Even Scoresby, the justly renowned
Right whaleman, after giving us a stiff full length of the Greenland
whale, and three or four delicate miniatures of narwhales and
porpoises, treats us to a series of classical engravings of boat hooks,
chopping knives, and grapnels; and with the microscopic diligence of a
Leuwenhoeck submits to the inspection of a shivering world ninety-six
fac-similes of magnified Arctic snow crystals. I mean no disparagement
to the excellent voyager (I honor him for a veteran), but in so
important a matter it was certainly an oversight not to have procured
for every crystal a sworn affidavit taken before a Greenland Justice of
the Peace.

In addition to those fine engravings from Garnery, there are two other
French engravings worthy of note, by some one who subscribes himself
“H. Durand.” One of them, though not precisely adapted to our present
purpose, nevertheless deserves mention on other accounts. It is a quiet
noon-scene among the isles of the Pacific; a French whaler anchored,
inshore, in a calm, and lazily taking water on board; the loosened
sails of the ship, and the long leaves of the palms in the background,
both drooping together in the breezeless air. The effect is very fine,
when considered with reference to its presenting the hardy fishermen
under one of their few aspects of oriental repose. The other engraving
is quite a different affair: the ship hove-to upon the open sea, and in
the very heart of the Leviathanic life, with a Right Whale alongside;
the vessel (in the act of cutting-in) hove over to the monster as if to
a quay; and a boat, hurriedly pushing off from this scene of activity,
is about giving chase to whales in the distance. The harpoons and
lances lie levelled for use; three oarsmen are just setting the mast in
its hole; while from a sudden roll of the sea, the little craft stands
half-erect out of the water, like a rearing horse. From the ship, the
smoke of the torments of the boiling whale is going up like the smoke
over a village of smithies; and to windward, a black cloud, rising up
with earnest of squalls and rains, seems to quicken the activity of the
excited seamen.


CHAPTER 57. Of Whales in Paint; in Teeth; in Wood; in Sheet-Iron; in
Stone; in Mountains; in Stars.

On Tower-hill, as you go down to the London docks, you may have seen a
crippled beggar (or _kedger_, as the sailors say) holding a painted
board before him, representing the tragic scene in which he lost his
leg. There are three whales and three boats; and one of the boats
(presumed to contain the missing leg in all its original integrity) is
being crunched by the jaws of the foremost whale. Any time these ten
years, they tell me, has that man held up that picture, and exhibited
that stump to an incredulous world. But the time of his justification
has now come. His three whales are as good whales as were ever
published in Wapping, at any rate; and his stump as unquestionable a
stump as any you will find in the western clearings. But, though for
ever mounted on that stump, never a stump-speech does the poor whaleman
make; but, with downcast eyes, stands ruefully contemplating his own
amputation.

Throughout the Pacific, and also in Nantucket, and New Bedford, and Sag
Harbor, you will come across lively sketches of whales and
whaling-scenes, graven by the fishermen themselves on Sperm
Whale-teeth, or ladies’ busks wrought out of the Right Whale-bone, and
other like skrimshander articles, as the whalemen call the numerous
little ingenious contrivances they elaborately carve out of the rough
material, in their hours of ocean leisure. Some of them have little
boxes of dentistical-looking implements, specially intended for the
skrimshandering business. But, in general, they toil with their
jack-knives alone; and, with that almost omnipotent tool of the sailor,
they will turn you out anything you please, in the way of a mariner’s
fancy.

Long exile from Christendom and civilization inevitably restores a man
to that condition in which God placed him, _i.e._ what is called
savagery. Your true whale-hunter is as much a savage as an Iroquois. I
myself am a savage, owning no allegiance but to the King of the
Cannibals; and ready at any moment to rebel against him.

Now, one of the peculiar characteristics of the savage in his domestic
hours, is his wonderful patience of industry. An ancient Hawaiian
war-club or spear-paddle, in its full multiplicity and elaboration of
carving, is as great a trophy of human perseverance as a Latin lexicon.
For, with but a bit of broken sea-shell or a shark’s tooth, that
miraculous intricacy of wooden net-work has been achieved; and it has
cost steady years of steady application.

As with the Hawaiian savage, so with the white sailor-savage. With the
same marvellous patience, and with the same single shark’s tooth, of
his one poor jack-knife, he will carve you a bit of bone sculpture, not
quite as workmanlike, but as close packed in its maziness of design, as
the Greek savage, Achilles’s shield; and full of barbaric spirit and
suggestiveness, as the prints of that fine old Dutch savage, Albert
Durer.

Wooden whales, or whales cut in profile out of the small dark slabs of
the noble South Sea war-wood, are frequently met with in the
forecastles of American whalers. Some of them are done with much
accuracy.

At some old gable-roofed country houses you will see brass whales hung
by the tail for knockers to the road-side door. When the porter is
sleepy, the anvil-headed whale would be best. But these knocking whales
are seldom remarkable as faithful essays. On the spires of some
old-fashioned churches you will see sheet-iron whales placed there for
weather-cocks; but they are so elevated, and besides that are to all
intents and purposes so labelled with “_Hands off!_” you cannot examine
them closely enough to decide upon their merit.

In bony, ribby regions of the earth, where at the base of high broken
cliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic groupings upon the plain,
you will often discover images as of the petrified forms of the
Leviathan partly merged in grass, which of a windy day breaks against
them in a surf of green surges.

Then, again, in mountainous countries where the traveller is
continually girdled by amphitheatrical heights; here and there from
some lucky point of view you will catch passing glimpses of the
profiles of whales defined along the undulating ridges. But you must be
a thorough whaleman, to see these sights; and not only that, but if you
wish to return to such a sight again, you must be sure and take the
exact intersecting latitude and longitude of your first stand-point,
else so chance-like are such observations of the hills, that your
precise, previous stand-point would require a laborious re-discovery;
like the Soloma Islands, which still remain incognita, though once
high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuera chronicled them.

Nor when expandingly lifted by your subject, can you fail to trace out
great whales in the starry heavens, and boats in pursuit of them; as
when long filled with thoughts of war the Eastern nations saw armies
locked in battle among the clouds. Thus at the North have I chased
Leviathan round and round the Pole with the revolutions of the bright
points that first defined him to me. And beneath the effulgent
Antarctic skies I have boarded the Argo-Navis, and joined the chase
against the starry Cetus far beyond the utmost stretch of Hydrus and
the Flying Fish.

With a frigate’s anchors for my bridle-bitts and fasces of harpoons for
spurs, would I could mount that whale and leap the topmost skies, to
see whether the fabled heavens with all their countless tents really
lie encamped beyond my mortal sight!


CHAPTER 58. Brit.

Steering north-eastward from the Crozetts, we fell in with vast meadows
of brit, the minute, yellow substance, upon which the Right Whale
largely feeds. For leagues and leagues it undulated round us, so that
we seemed to be sailing through boundless fields of ripe and golden
wheat.

On the second day, numbers of Right Whales were seen, who, secure from
the attack of a Sperm Whaler like the Pequod, with open jaws sluggishly
swam through the brit, which, adhering to the fringing fibres of that
wondrous Venetian blind in their mouths, was in that manner separated
from the water that escaped at the lip.

As morning mowers, who side by side slowly and seethingly advance their
scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads; even so these
monsters swam, making a strange, grassy, cutting sound; and leaving
behind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow sea.*

*That part of the sea known among whalemen as the “Brazil Banks” does
not bear that name as the Banks of Newfoundland do, because of there
being shallows and soundings there, but because of this remarkable
meadow-like appearance, caused by the vast drifts of brit continually
floating in those latitudes, where the Right Whale is often chased.

But it was only the sound they made as they parted the brit which at
all reminded one of mowers. Seen from the mast-heads, especially when
they paused and were stationary for a while, their vast black forms
looked more like lifeless masses of rock than anything else. And as in
the great hunting countries of India, the stranger at a distance will
sometimes pass on the plains recumbent elephants without knowing them
to be such, taking them for bare, blackened elevations of the soil;
even so, often, with him, who for the first time beholds this species
of the leviathans of the sea. And even when recognised at last, their
immense magnitude renders it very hard really to believe that such
bulky masses of overgrowth can possibly be instinct, in all parts, with
the same sort of life that lives in a dog or a horse.

Indeed, in other respects, you can hardly regard any creatures of the
deep with the same feelings that you do those of the shore. For though
some old naturalists have maintained that all creatures of the land are
of their kind in the sea; and though taking a broad general view of the
thing, this may very well be; yet coming to specialties, where, for
example, does the ocean furnish any fish that in disposition answers to
the sagacious kindness of the dog? The accursed shark alone can in any
generic respect be said to bear comparative analogy to him.

But though, to landsmen in general, the native inhabitants of the seas
have ever been regarded with emotions unspeakably unsocial and
repelling; though we know the sea to be an everlasting terra incognita,
so that Columbus sailed over numberless unknown worlds to discover his
one superficial western one; though, by vast odds, the most terrific of
all mortal disasters have immemorially and indiscriminately befallen
tens and hundreds of thousands of those who have gone upon the waters;
though but a moment’s consideration will teach, that however baby man
may brag of his science and skill, and however much, in a flattering
future, that science and skill may augment; yet for ever and for ever,
to the crack of doom, the sea will insult and murder him, and pulverize
the stateliest, stiffest frigate he can make; nevertheless, by the
continual repetition of these very impressions, man has lost that sense
of the full awfulness of the sea which aboriginally belongs to it.

The first boat we read of, floated on an ocean, that with Portuguese
vengeance had whelmed a whole world without leaving so much as a widow.
That same ocean rolls now; that same ocean destroyed the wrecked ships
of last year. Yea, foolish mortals, Noah’s flood is not yet subsided;
two thirds of the fair world it yet covers.

Wherein differ the sea and the land, that a miracle upon one is not a
miracle upon the other? Preternatural terrors rested upon the Hebrews,
when under the feet of Korah and his company the live ground opened and
swallowed them up for ever; yet not a modern sun ever sets, but in
precisely the same manner the live sea swallows up ships and crews.

But not only is the sea such a foe to man who is an alien to it, but it
is also a fiend to its own off-spring; worse than the Persian host who
murdered his own guests; sparing not the creatures which itself hath
spawned. Like a savage tigress that tossing in the jungle overlays her
own cubs, so the sea dashes even the mightiest whales against the
rocks, and leaves them there side by side with the split wrecks of
ships. No mercy, no power but its own controls it. Panting and snorting
like a mad battle steed that has lost its rider, the masterless ocean
overruns the globe.

Consider the subtleness of the sea; how its most dreaded creatures
glide under water, unapparent for the most part, and treacherously
hidden beneath the loveliest tints of azure. Consider also the devilish
brilliance and beauty of many of its most remorseless tribes, as the
dainty embellished shape of many species of sharks. Consider, once
more, the universal cannibalism of the sea; all whose creatures prey
upon each other, carrying on eternal war since the world began.

Consider all this; and then turn to this green, gentle, and most docile
earth; consider them both, the sea and the land; and do you not find a
strange analogy to something in yourself? For as this appalling ocean
surrounds the verdant land, so in the soul of man there lies one
insular Tahiti, full of peace and joy, but encompassed by all the
horrors of the half known life. God keep thee! Push not off from that
isle, thou canst never return!


CHAPTER 59. Squid.

Slowly wading through the meadows of brit, the Pequod still held on her
way north-eastward towards the island of Java; a gentle air impelling
her keel, so that in the surrounding serenity her three tall tapering
masts mildly waved to that languid breeze, as three mild palms on a
plain. And still, at wide intervals in the silvery night, the lonely,
alluring jet would be seen.

But one transparent blue morning, when a stillness almost preternatural
spread over the sea, however unattended with any stagnant calm; when
the long burnished sun-glade on the waters seemed a golden finger laid
across them, enjoining some secrecy; when the slippered waves whispered
together as they softly ran on; in this profound hush of the visible
sphere a strange spectre was seen by Daggoo from the main-mast-head.

In the distance, a great white mass lazily rose, and rising higher and
higher, and disentangling itself from the azure, at last gleamed before
our prow like a snow-slide, new slid from the hills. Thus glistening
for a moment, as slowly it subsided, and sank. Then once more arose,
and silently gleamed. It seemed not a whale; and yet is this Moby Dick?
thought Daggoo. Again the phantom went down, but on re-appearing once
more, with a stiletto-like cry that startled every man from his nod,
the negro yelled out—“There! there again! there she breaches! right
ahead! The White Whale, the White Whale!”

Upon this, the seamen rushed to the yard-arms, as in swarming-time the
bees rush to the boughs. Bare-headed in the sultry sun, Ahab stood on
the bowsprit, and with one hand pushed far behind in readiness to wave
his orders to the helmsman, cast his eager glance in the direction
indicated aloft by the outstretched motionless arm of Daggoo.

Whether the flitting attendance of the one still and solitary jet had
gradually worked upon Ahab, so that he was now prepared to connect the
ideas of mildness and repose with the first sight of the particular
whale he pursued; however this was, or whether his eagerness betrayed
him; whichever way it might have been, no sooner did he distinctly
perceive the white mass, than with a quick intensity he instantly gave
orders for lowering.

The four boats were soon on the water; Ahab’s in advance, and all
swiftly pulling towards their prey. Soon it went down, and while, with
oars suspended, we were awaiting its reappearance, lo! in the same spot
where it sank, once more it slowly rose. Almost forgetting for the
moment all thoughts of Moby Dick, we now gazed at the most wondrous
phenomenon which the secret seas have hitherto revealed to mankind. A
vast pulpy mass, furlongs in length and breadth, of a glancing
cream-colour, lay floating on the water, innumerable long arms
radiating from its centre, and curling and twisting like a nest of
anacondas, as if blindly to clutch at any hapless object within reach.
No perceptible face or front did it have; no conceivable token of
either sensation or instinct; but undulated there on the billows, an
unearthly, formless, chance-like apparition of life.

As with a low sucking sound it slowly disappeared again, Starbuck still
gazing at the agitated waters where it had sunk, with a wild voice
exclaimed—“Almost rather had I seen Moby Dick and fought him, than to
have seen thee, thou white ghost!”

“What was it, Sir?” said Flask.

“The great live squid, which, they say, few whale-ships ever beheld,
and returned to their ports to tell of it.”

But Ahab said nothing; turning his boat, he sailed back to the vessel;
the rest as silently following.

Whatever superstitions the sperm whalemen in general have connected
with the sight of this object, certain it is, that a glimpse of it
being so very unusual, that circumstance has gone far to invest it with
portentousness. So rarely is it beheld, that though one and all of them
declare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean, yet very few
of them have any but the most vague ideas concerning its true nature
and form; notwithstanding, they believe it to furnish to the sperm
whale his only food. For though other species of whales find their food
above water, and may be seen by man in the act of feeding, the
spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown zones below the
surface; and only by inference is it that any one can tell of what,
precisely, that food consists. At times, when closely pursued, he will
disgorge what are supposed to be the detached arms of the squid; some
of them thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirty feet in length. They
fancy that the monster to which these arms belonged ordinarily clings
by them to the bed of the ocean; and that the sperm whale, unlike other
species, is supplied with teeth in order to attack and tear it.

There seems some ground to imagine that the great Kraken of Bishop
Pontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into Squid. The manner in
which the Bishop describes it, as alternately rising and sinking, with
some other particulars he narrates, in all this the two correspond. But
much abatement is necessary with respect to the incredible bulk he
assigns it.

By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumors of the mysterious
creature, here spoken of, it is included among the class of
cuttle-fish, to which, indeed, in certain external respects it would
seem to belong, but only as the Anak of the tribe.


CHAPTER 60. The Line.

With reference to the whaling scene shortly to be described, as well as
for the better understanding of all similar scenes elsewhere presented,
I have here to speak of the magical, sometimes horrible whale-line.

The line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp, slightly
vapored with tar, not impregnated with it, as in the case of ordinary
ropes; for while tar, as ordinarily used, makes the hemp more pliable
to the rope-maker, and also renders the rope itself more convenient to
the sailor for common ship use; yet, not only would the ordinary
quantity too much stiffen the whale-line for the close coiling to which
it must be subjected; but as most seamen are beginning to learn, tar in
general by no means adds to the rope’s durability or strength, however
much it may give it compactness and gloss.

Of late years the Manilla rope has in the American fishery almost
entirely superseded hemp as a material for whale-lines; for, though not
so durable as hemp, it is stronger, and far more soft and elastic; and
I will add (since there is an æsthetics in all things), is much more
handsome and becoming to the boat, than hemp. Hemp is a dusky, dark
fellow, a sort of Indian; but Manilla is as a golden-haired Circassian
to behold.

The whale-line is only two-thirds of an inch in thickness. At first
sight, you would not think it so strong as it really is. By experiment
its one and fifty yarns will each suspend a weight of one hundred and
twenty pounds; so that the whole rope will bear a strain nearly equal
to three tons. In length, the common sperm whale-line measures
something over two hundred fathoms. Towards the stern of the boat it is
spirally coiled away in the tub, not like the worm-pipe of a still
though, but so as to form one round, cheese-shaped mass of densely
bedded “sheaves,” or layers of concentric spiralizations, without any
hollow but the “heart,” or minute vertical tube formed at the axis of
the cheese. As the least tangle or kink in the coiling would, in
running out, infallibly take somebody’s arm, leg, or entire body off,
the utmost precaution is used in stowing the line in its tub. Some
harpooneers will consume almost an entire morning in this business,
carrying the line high aloft and then reeving it downwards through a
block towards the tub, so as in the act of coiling to free it from all
possible wrinkles and twists.

In the English boats two tubs are used instead of one; the same line
being continuously coiled in both tubs. There is some advantage in
this; because these twin-tubs being so small they fit more readily into
the boat, and do not strain it so much; whereas, the American tub,
nearly three feet in diameter and of proportionate depth, makes a
rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks are but one half-inch in
thickness; for the bottom of the whale-boat is like critical ice, which
will bear up a considerable distributed weight, but not very much of a
concentrated one. When the painted canvas cover is clapped on the
American line-tub, the boat looks as if it were pulling off with a
prodigious great wedding-cake to present to the whales.

Both ends of the line are exposed; the lower end terminating in an
eye-splice or loop coming up from the bottom against the side of the
tub, and hanging over its edge completely disengaged from everything.
This arrangement of the lower end is necessary on two accounts. First:
In order to facilitate the fastening to it of an additional line from a
neighboring boat, in case the stricken whale should sound so deep as to
threaten to carry off the entire line originally attached to the
harpoon. In these instances, the whale of course is shifted like a mug
of ale, as it were, from the one boat to the other; though the first
boat always hovers at hand to assist its consort. Second: This
arrangement is indispensable for common safety’s sake; for were the
lower end of the line in any way attached to the boat, and were the
whale then to run the line out to the end almost in a single, smoking
minute as he sometimes does, he would not stop there, for the doomed
boat would infallibly be dragged down after him into the profundity of
the sea; and in that case no town-crier would ever find her again.

Before lowering the boat for the chase, the upper end of the line is
taken aft from the tub, and passing round the loggerhead there, is
again carried forward the entire length of the boat, resting crosswise
upon the loom or handle of every man’s oar, so that it jogs against his
wrist in rowing; and also passing between the men, as they alternately
sit at the opposite gunwales, to the leaded chocks or grooves in the
extreme pointed prow of the boat, where a wooden pin or skewer the size
of a common quill, prevents it from slipping out. From the chocks it
hangs in a slight festoon over the bows, and is then passed inside the
boat again; and some ten or twenty fathoms (called box-line) being
coiled upon the box in the bows, it continues its way to the gunwale
still a little further aft, and is then attached to the short-warp—the
rope which is immediately connected with the harpoon; but previous to
that connexion, the short-warp goes through sundry mystifications too
tedious to detail.

Thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its complicated coils,
twisting and writhing around it in almost every direction. All the
oarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions; so that to the timid
eye of the landsman, they seem as Indian jugglers, with the deadliest
snakes sportively festooning their limbs. Nor can any son of mortal
woman, for the first time, seat himself amid those hempen intricacies,
and while straining his utmost at the oar, bethink him that at any
unknown instant the harpoon may be darted, and all these horrible
contortions be put in play like ringed lightnings; he cannot be thus
circumstanced without a shudder that makes the very marrow in his bones
to quiver in him like a shaken jelly. Yet habit—strange thing! what
cannot habit accomplish?—Gayer sallies, more merry mirth, better jokes,
and brighter repartees, you never heard over your mahogany, than you
will hear over the half-inch white cedar of the whale-boat, when thus
hung in hangman’s nooses; and, like the six burghers of Calais before
King Edward, the six men composing the crew pull into the jaws of
death, with a halter around every neck, as you may say.

Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to account for those
repeated whaling disasters—some few of which are casually chronicled—of
this man or that man being taken out of the boat by the line, and lost.
For, when the line is darting out, to be seated then in the boat, is
like being seated in the midst of the manifold whizzings of a
steam-engine in full play, when every flying beam, and shaft, and
wheel, is grazing you. It is worse; for you cannot sit motionless in
the heart of these perils, because the boat is rocking like a cradle,
and you are pitched one way and the other, without the slightest
warning; and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy and
simultaneousness of volition and action, can you escape being made a
Mazeppa of, and run away with where the all-seeing sun himself could
never pierce you out.

Again: as the profound calm which only apparently precedes and
prophesies of the storm, is perhaps more awful than the storm itself;
for, indeed, the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm; and
contains it in itself, as the seemingly harmless rifle holds the fatal
powder, and the ball, and the explosion; so the graceful repose of the
line, as it silently serpentines about the oarsmen before being brought
into actual play—this is a thing which carries more of true terror than
any other aspect of this dangerous affair. But why say more? All men
live enveloped in whale-lines. All are born with halters round their
necks; but it is only when caught in the swift, sudden turn of death,
that mortals realize the silent, subtle, ever-present perils of life.
And if you be a philosopher, though seated in the whale-boat, you would
not at heart feel one whit more of terror, than though seated before
your evening fire with a poker, and not a harpoon, by your side.


CHAPTER 61. Stubb Kills a Whale.

If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents, to
Queequeg it was quite a different object.

“When you see him ’quid,” said the savage, honing his harpoon in the
bow of his hoisted boat, “then you quick see him ’parm whale.”

The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing special
to engage them, the Pequod’s crew could hardly resist the spell of
sleep induced by such a vacant sea. For this part of the Indian Ocean
through which we then were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively
ground; that is, it affords fewer glimpses of porpoises, dolphins,
flying-fish, and other vivacious denizens of more stirring waters, than
those off the Rio de la Plata, or the in-shore ground off Peru.

It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shoulders
leaning against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed
in what seemed an enchanted air. No resolution could withstand it; in
that dreamy mood losing all consciousness, at last my soul went out of
my body; though my body still continued to sway as a pendulum will,
long after the power which first moved it is withdrawn.

Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the
seamen at the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy. So that
at last all three of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for every
swing that we made there was a nod from below from the slumbering
helmsman. The waves, too, nodded their indolent crests; and across the
wide trance of the sea, east nodded to west, and the sun over all.

Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices my
hands grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency preserved
me; with a shock I came back to life. And lo! close under our lee, not
forty fathoms off, a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in the water like
the capsized hull of a frigate, his broad, glossy back, of an Ethiopian
hue, glistening in the sun’s rays like a mirror. But lazily undulating
in the trough of the sea, and ever and anon tranquilly spouting his
vapory jet, the whale looked like a portly burgher smoking his pipe of
a warm afternoon. But that pipe, poor whale, was thy last. As if struck
by some enchanter’s wand, the sleepy ship and every sleeper in it all
at once started into wakefulness; and more than a score of voices from
all parts of the vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from
aloft, shouted forth the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and
regularly spouted the sparkling brine into the air.

“Clear away the boats! Luff!” cried Ahab. And obeying his own order, he
dashed the helm down before the helmsman could handle the spokes.

The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and
ere the boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the
leeward, but with such a steady tranquillity, and making so few ripples
as he swam, that thinking after all he might not as yet be alarmed,
Ahab gave orders that not an oar should be used, and no man must speak
but in whispers. So seated like Ontario Indians on the gunwales of the
boats, we swiftly but silently paddled along; the calm not admitting of
the noiseless sails being set. Presently, as we thus glided in chase,
the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail forty feet into the air,
and then sank out of sight like a tower swallowed up.

“There go flukes!” was the cry, an announcement immediately followed by
Stubb’s producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now a respite
was granted. After the full interval of his sounding had elapsed, the
whale rose again, and being now in advance of the smoker’s boat, and
much nearer to it than to any of the others, Stubb counted upon the
honor of the capture. It was obvious, now, that the whale had at length
become aware of his pursuers. All silence of cautiousness was therefore
no longer of use. Paddles were dropped, and oars came loudly into play.
And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb cheered on his crew to the
assault.

Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish. All alive to his jeopardy,
he was going “head out”; that part obliquely projecting from the mad
yeast which he brewed.*

*It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance the
entire interior of the sperm whale’s enormous head consists. Though
apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant part about
him. So that with ease he elevates it in the air, and invariably does
so when going at his utmost speed. Besides, such is the breadth of the
upper part of the front of his head, and such the tapering cut-water
formation of the lower part, that by obliquely elevating his head, he
thereby may be said to transform himself from a bluff-bowed sluggish
galliot into a sharppointed New York pilot-boat.

“Start her, start her, my men! Don’t hurry yourselves; take plenty of
time—but start her; start her like thunder-claps, that’s all,” cried
Stubb, spluttering out the smoke as he spoke. “Start her, now; give ’em
the long and strong stroke, Tashtego. Start her, Tash, my boy—start
her, all; but keep cool, keep cool—cucumbers is the word—easy,
easy—only start her like grim death and grinning devils, and raise the
buried dead perpendicular out of their graves, boys—that’s all. Start
her!”

“Woo-hoo! Wa-hee!” screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some old
war-whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat
involuntarily bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke
which the eager Indian gave.

But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild. “Kee-hee!
Kee-hee!” yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards on his seat,
like a pacing tiger in his cage.

“Ka-la! Koo-loo!” howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a
mouthful of Grenadier’s steak. And thus with oars and yells the keels
cut the sea. Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the van, still
encouraged his men to the onset, all the while puffing the smoke from
his mouth. Like desperadoes they tugged and they strained, till the
welcome cry was heard—“Stand up, Tashtego!—give it to him!” The harpoon
was hurled. “Stern all!” The oarsmen backed water; the same moment
something went hot and hissing along every one of their wrists. It was
the magical line. An instant before, Stubb had swiftly caught two
additional turns with it round the loggerhead, whence, by reason of its
increased rapid circlings, a hempen blue smoke now jetted up and
mingled with the steady fumes from his pipe. As the line passed round
and round the loggerhead; so also, just before reaching that point, it
blisteringly passed through and through both of Stubb’s hands, from
which the hand-cloths, or squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at
these times, had accidentally dropped. It was like holding an enemy’s
sharp two-edged sword by the blade, and that enemy all the time
striving to wrest it out of your clutch.

“Wet the line! wet the line!” cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him
seated by the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water into
it.* More turns were taken, so that the line began holding its place.
The boat now flew through the boiling water like a shark all fins.
Stubb and Tashtego here changed places—stem for stern—a staggering
business truly in that rocking commotion.

*Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be
stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the
running line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or
bailer, is set apart for that purpose. Your hat, however, is the most
convenient.

From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part
of the boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you
would have thought the craft had two keels—one cleaving the water, the
other the air—as the boat churned on through both opposing elements at
once. A continual cascade played at the bows; a ceaseless whirling eddy
in her wake; and, at the slightest motion from within, even but of a
little finger, the vibrating, cracking craft canted over her spasmodic
gunwale into the sea. Thus they rushed; each man with might and main
clinging to his seat, to prevent being tossed to the foam; and the tall
form of Tashtego at the steering oar crouching almost double, in order
to bring down his centre of gravity. Whole Atlantics and Pacifics
seemed passed as they shot on their way, till at length the whale
somewhat slackened his flight.

“Haul in—haul in!” cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing round
towards the whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while
yet the boat was being towed on. Soon ranging up by his flank, Stubb,
firmly planting his knee in the clumsy cleat, darted dart after dart
into the flying fish; at the word of command, the boat alternately
sterning out of the way of the whale’s horrible wallow, and then
ranging up for another fling.

The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks down
a hill. His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood, which
bubbled and seethed for furlongs behind in their wake. The slanting sun
playing upon this crimson pond in the sea, sent back its reflection
into every face, so that they all glowed to each other like red men.
And all the while, jet after jet of white smoke was agonizingly shot
from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff after puff from the
mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart, hauling in upon his
crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb straightened it again
and again, by a few rapid blows against the gunwale, then again and
again sent it into the whale.

“Pull up—pull up!” he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale
relaxed in his wrath. “Pull up!—close to!” and the boat ranged along
the fish’s flank. When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly churned
his long sharp lance into the fish, and kept it there, carefully
churning and churning, as if cautiously seeking to feel after some gold
watch that the whale might have swallowed, and which he was fearful of
breaking ere he could hook it out. But that gold watch he sought was
the innermost life of the fish. And now it is struck; for, starting
from his trance into that unspeakable thing called his “flurry,” the
monster horribly wallowed in his blood, overwrapped himself in
impenetrable, mad, boiling spray, so that the imperilled craft,
instantly dropping astern, had much ado blindly to struggle out from
that phrensied twilight into the clear air of the day.

And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into
view; surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and contracting
his spout-hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized respirations. At last,
gush after gush of clotted red gore, as if it had been the purple lees
of red wine, shot into the frighted air; and falling back again, ran
dripping down his motionless flanks into the sea. His heart had burst!

“He’s dead, Mr. Stubb,” said Daggoo.

“Yes; both pipes smoked out!” and withdrawing his own from his mouth,
Stubb scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment, stood
thoughtfully eyeing the vast corpse he had made.


CHAPTER 62. The Dart.

A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.

According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat pushes
off from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as temporary
steersman, and the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the foremost
oar, the one known as the harpooneer-oar. Now it needs a strong,
nervous arm to strike the first iron into the fish; for often, in what
is called a long dart, the heavy implement has to be flung to the
distance of twenty or thirty feet. But however prolonged and exhausting
the chase, the harpooneer is expected to pull his oar meanwhile to the
uttermost; indeed, he is expected to set an example of superhuman
activity to the rest, not only by incredible rowing, but by repeated
loud and intrepid exclamations; and what it is to keep shouting at the
top of one’s compass, while all the other muscles are strained and half
started—what that is none know but those who have tried it. For one, I
cannot bawl very heartily and work very recklessly at one and the same
time. In this straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the
fish, all at once the exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting
cry—“Stand up, and give it to him!” He now has to drop and secure his
oar, turn round on his centre half way, seize his harpoon from the
crotch, and with what little strength may remain, he essays to pitch it
somehow into the whale. No wonder, taking the whole fleet of whalemen
in a body, that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are
successful; no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed
and disrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst their
blood-vessels in the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are
absent four years with four barrels; no wonder that to many ship
owners, whaling is but a losing concern; for it is the harpooneer that
makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out of his body how can
you expect to find it there when most wanted!

Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical instant,
that is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and harpooneer
likewise start to running fore and aft, to the imminent jeopardy of
themselves and every one else. It is then they change places; and the
headsman, the chief officer of the little craft, takes his proper
station in the bows of the boat.

Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both
foolish and unnecessary. The headsman should stay in the bows from
first to last; he should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no
rowing whatever should be expected of him, except under circumstances
obvious to any fisherman. I know that this would sometimes involve a
slight loss of speed in the chase; but long experience in various
whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me that in the vast
majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means been so
much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the
harpooneer that has caused them.

To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of this
world must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not from out
of toil.


CHAPTER 63. The Crotch.

Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs. So, in
productive subjects, grow the chapters.

The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent mention.
It is a notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in length,
which is perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale near the
bow, for the purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden extremity of
the harpoon, whose other naked, barbed end slopingly projects from the
prow. Thereby the weapon is instantly at hand to its hurler, who
snatches it up as readily from its rest as a backwoodsman swings his
rifle from the wall. It is customary to have two harpoons reposing in
the crotch, respectively called the first and second irons.

But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with
the line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one
instantly after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the
coming drag, one should draw out, the other may still retain a hold. It
is a doubling of the chances. But it very often happens that owing to
the instantaneous, violent, convulsive running of the whale upon
receiving the first iron, it becomes impossible for the harpooneer,
however lightning-like in his movements, to pitch the second iron into
him. Nevertheless, as the second iron is already connected with the
line, and the line is running, hence that weapon must, at all events,
be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat, somehow and somewhere; else
the most terrible jeopardy would involve all hands. Tumbled into the
water, it accordingly is in such cases; the spare coils of box line
(mentioned in a preceding chapter) making this feat, in most instances,
prudently practicable. But this critical act is not always unattended
with the saddest and most fatal casualties.

Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrown
overboard, it thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror,
skittishly curvetting about both boat and whale, entangling the lines,
or cutting them, and making a prodigious sensation in all directions.
Nor, in general, is it possible to secure it again until the whale is
fairly captured and a corpse.

Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging
one unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to these
qualities in him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of
such an audacious enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be
simultaneously dangling about him. For, of course, each boat is
supplied with several harpoons to bend on to the line should the first
one be ineffectually darted without recovery. All these particulars are
faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to elucidate several
most important, however intricate passages, in scenes hereafter to be
painted.


CHAPTER 64. Stubb’s Supper.

Stubb’s whale had been killed some distance from the ship. It was a
calm; so, forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow
business of towing the trophy to the Pequod. And now, as we eighteen
men with our thirty-six arms, and one hundred and eighty thumbs and
fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour upon that inert, sluggish corpse
in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at all, except at long
intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the enormousness of
the mass we moved. For, upon the great canal of Hang-Ho, or whatever
they call it, in China, four or five laborers on the foot-path will
draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile an hour; but this
grand argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if laden with pig-lead
in bulk.

Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod’s
main-rigging dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab
dropping one of several more lanterns over the bulwarks. Vacantly
eyeing the heaving whale for a moment, he issued the usual orders for
securing it for the night, and then handing his lantern to a seaman,
went his way into the cabin, and did not come forward again until
morning.

Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had
evinced his customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the
creature was dead, some vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or
despair, seemed working in him; as if the sight of that dead body
reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain; and though a thousand
other whales were brought to his ship, all that would not one jot
advance his grand, monomaniac object. Very soon you would have thought
from the sound on the Pequod’s decks, that all hands were preparing to
cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being dragged along the
deck, and thrust rattling out of the port-holes. But by those clanking
links, the vast corpse itself, not the ship, is to be moored. Tied by
the head to the stern, and by the tail to the bows, the whale now lies
with its black hull close to the vessel’s and seen through the darkness
of the night, which obscured the spars and rigging aloft, the two—ship
and whale, seemed yoked together like colossal bullocks, whereof one
reclines while the other remains standing.*

*A little item may as well be related here. The strongest and most
reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored alongside,
is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density that part is
relatively heavier than any other (excepting the side-fins), its
flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low beneath the surface;
so that with the hand you cannot get at it from the boat, in order to
put the chain round it. But this difficulty is ingeniously overcome: a
small, strong line is prepared with a wooden float at its outer end,
and a weight in its middle, while the other end is secured to the ship.
By adroit management the wooden float is made to rise on the other side
of the mass, so that now having girdled the whale, the chain is readily
made to follow suit; and being slipped along the body, is at last
locked fast round the smallest part of the tail, at the point of
junction with its broad flukes or lobes.

If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be known
on deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest, betrayed an
unusual but still good-natured excitement. Such an unwonted bustle was
he in that the staid Starbuck, his official superior, quietly resigned
to him for the time the sole management of affairs. One small, helping
cause of all this liveliness in Stubb, was soon made strangely
manifest. Stubb was a high liver; he was somewhat intemperately fond of
the whale as a flavorish thing to his palate.

“A steak, a steak, ere I sleep! You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and cut
me one from his small!”

Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a general
thing, and according to the great military maxim, make the enemy defray
the current expenses of the war (at least before realizing the proceeds
of the voyage), yet now and then you find some of these Nantucketers
who have a genuine relish for that particular part of the Sperm Whale
designated by Stubb; comprising the tapering extremity of the body.

About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two
lanterns of sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti supper
at the capstan-head, as if that capstan were a sideboard. Nor was Stubb
the only banqueter on whale’s flesh that night. Mingling their
mumblings with his own mastications, thousands on thousands of sharks,
swarming round the dead leviathan, smackingly feasted on its fatness.
The few sleepers below in their bunks were often startled by the sharp
slapping of their tails against the hull, within a few inches of the
sleepers’ hearts. Peering over the side you could just see them (as
before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black waters, and
turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge globular pieces of
the whale of the bigness of a human head. This particular feat of the
shark seems all but miraculous. How at such an apparently unassailable
surface, they contrive to gouge out such symmetrical mouthfuls, remains
a part of the universal problem of all things. The mark they thus leave
on the whale, may best be likened to the hollow made by a carpenter in
countersinking for a screw.

Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight, sharks
will be seen longingly gazing up to the ship’s decks, like hungry dogs
round a table where red meat is being carved, ready to bolt down every
killed man that is tossed to them; and though, while the valiant
butchers over the deck-table are thus cannibally carving each other’s
live meat with carving-knives all gilded and tasselled, the sharks,
also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are quarrelsomely carving away
under the table at the dead meat; and though, were you to turn the
whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much the same thing,
that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough for all parties;
and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave ships
crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting alongside, to be handy
in case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or a dead slave to be
decently buried; and though one or two other like instances might be
set down, touching the set terms, places, and occasions, when sharks do
most socially congregate, and most hilariously feast; yet is there no
conceivable time or occasion when you will find them in such countless
numbers, and in gayer or more jovial spirits, than around a dead sperm
whale, moored by night to a whaleship at sea. If you have never seen
that sight, then suspend your decision about the propriety of
devil-worship, and the expediency of conciliating the devil.

But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was
going on so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of
his own epicurean lips.

“Cook, cook!—where’s that old Fleece?” he cried at length, widening his
legs still further, as if to form a more secure base for his supper;
and, at the same time darting his fork into the dish, as if stabbing
with his lance; “cook, you cook!—sail this way, cook!”

The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously
roused from his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came
shambling along from his galley, for, like many old blacks, there was
something the matter with his knee-pans, which he did not keep well
scoured like his other pans; this old Fleece, as they called him, came
shuffling and limping along, assisting his step with his tongs, which,
after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened iron hoops; this old
Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of command, came
to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb’s sideboard; when, with
both hands folded before him, and resting on his two-legged cane, he
bowed his arched back still further over, at the same time sideways
inclining his head, so as to bring his best ear into play.

“Cook,” said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his
mouth, “don’t you think this steak is rather overdone? You’ve been
beating this steak too much, cook; it’s too tender. Don’t I always say
that to be good, a whale-steak must be tough? There are those sharks
now over the side, don’t you see they prefer it tough and rare? What a
shindy they are kicking up! Cook, go and talk to ’em; tell ’em they are
welcome to help themselves civilly, and in moderation, but they must
keep quiet. Blast me, if I can hear my own voice. Away, cook, and
deliver my message. Here, take this lantern,” snatching one from his
sideboard; “now then, go and preach to ’em!”

Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the deck
to the bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low over
the sea, so as to get a good view of his congregation, with the other
hand he solemnly flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the side in
a mumbling voice began addressing the sharks, while Stubb, softly
crawling behind, overheard all that was said.

“Fellow-critters: I’se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam
noise dare. You hear? Stop dat dam smackin’ ob de lip! Massa Stubb say
dat you can fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but by Gor! you
must stop dat dam racket!”

“Cook,” here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden slap
on the shoulder,—“Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn’t swear that way
when you’re preaching. That’s no way to convert sinners, cook!”

“Who dat? Den preach to him yourself,” sullenly turning to go.

“No, cook; go on, go on.”

“Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:”—

“Right!” exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, “coax ’em to it; try that,” and
Fleece continued.

“Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you,
fellow-critters, dat dat woraciousness—’top dat dam slappin’ ob de
tail! How you tink to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin’ and
bitin’ dare?”

“Cook,” cried Stubb, collaring him, “I won’t have that swearing. Talk
to ’em gentlemanly.”

Once more the sermon proceeded.

“Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don’t blame ye so much for; dat
is natur, and can’t be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur, dat is
de pint. You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in you, why
den you be angel; for all angel is not’ing more dan de shark well
goberned. Now, look here, bred’ren, just try wonst to be cibil, a
helping yourselbs from dat whale. Don’t be tearin’ de blubber out your
neighbour’s mout, I say. Is not one shark dood right as toder to dat
whale? And, by Gor, none on you has de right to dat whale; dat whale
belong to some one else. I know some o’ you has berry brig mout,
brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de small
bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid, but to
bit off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can’t get into de
scrouge to help demselves.”

“Well done, old Fleece!” cried Stubb, “that’s Christianity; go on.”

“No use goin’ on; de dam willains will keep a scougin’ and slappin’
each oder, Massa Stubb; dey don’t hear one word; no use a-preachin’ to
such dam g’uttons as you call ’em, till dare bellies is full, and dare
bellies is bottomless; and when dey do get ’em full, dey wont hear you
den; for den dey sink in de sea, go fast to sleep on de coral, and
can’t hear not’ing at all, no more, for eber and eber.”

“Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the benediction,
Fleece, and I’ll away to my supper.”

Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his
shrill voice, and cried—

“Cussed fellow-critters! Kick up de damndest row as ever you can; fill
your dam’ bellies ’till dey bust—and den die.”

“Now, cook,” said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; “stand
just where you stood before, there, over against me, and pay particular
attention.”

“All dention,” said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in the
desired position.

“Well,” said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; “I shall now go
back to the subject of this steak. In the first place, how old are you,
cook?”

“What dat do wid de ’teak,” said the old black, testily.

“Silence! How old are you, cook?”

“’Bout ninety, dey say,” he gloomily muttered.

“And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook,
and don’t know yet how to cook a whale-steak?” rapidly bolting another
mouthful at the last word, so that morsel seemed a continuation of the
question. “Where were you born, cook?”

“’Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin’ ober de Roanoke.”

“Born in a ferry-boat! That’s queer, too. But I want to know what
country you were born in, cook!”

“Didn’t I say de Roanoke country?” he cried sharply.

“No, you didn’t, cook; but I’ll tell you what I’m coming to, cook. You
must go home and be born over again; you don’t know how to cook a
whale-steak yet.”

“Bress my soul, if I cook noder one,” he growled, angrily, turning
round to depart.

“Come back, cook;—here, hand me those tongs;—now take that bit of steak
there, and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it should be? Take
it, I say”—holding the tongs towards him—“take it, and taste it.”

Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old negro
muttered, “Best cooked ’teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy.”

“Cook,” said Stubb, squaring himself once more; “do you belong to the
church?”

“Passed one once in Cape-Down,” said the old man sullenly.

“And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town,
where you doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as
his beloved fellow-creatures, have you, cook! And yet you come here,
and tell me such a dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?” said Stubb.
“Where do you expect to go to, cook?”

“Go to bed berry soon,” he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.

“Avast! heave to! I mean when you die, cook. It’s an awful question.
Now what’s your answer?”

“When dis old brack man dies,” said the negro slowly, changing his
whole air and demeanor, “he hisself won’t go nowhere; but some bressed
angel will come and fetch him.”

“Fetch him? How? In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah? And fetch
him where?”

“Up dere,” said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and
keeping it there very solemnly.

“So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when
you are dead? But don’t you know the higher you climb, the colder it
gets? Main-top, eh?”

“Didn’t say dat t’all,” said Fleece, again in the sulks.

“You said up there, didn’t you? and now look yourself, and see where
your tongs are pointing. But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven by
crawling through the lubber’s hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you don’t
get there, except you go the regular way, round by the rigging. It’s a
ticklish business, but must be done, or else it’s no go. But none of us
are in heaven yet. Drop your tongs, cook, and hear my orders. Do ye
hear? Hold your hat in one hand, and clap t’other a’top of your heart,
when I’m giving my orders, cook. What! that your heart, there?—that’s
your gizzard! Aloft! aloft!—that’s it—now you have it. Hold it there
now, and pay attention.”

“All ’dention,” said the old black, with both hands placed as desired,
vainly wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears in front at
one and the same time.

“Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad,
that I have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that,
don’t you? Well, for the future, when you cook another whale-steak for
my private table here, the capstan, I’ll tell you what to do so as not
to spoil it by overdoing. Hold the steak in one hand, and show a live
coal to it with the other; that done, dish it; d’ye hear? And now
to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish, be sure you stand by
to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle. As for the ends
of the flukes, have them soused, cook. There, now ye may go.”

But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.

“Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch.
D’ye hear? away you sail, then.—Halloa! stop! make a bow before you
go.—Avast heaving again! Whale-balls for breakfast—don’t forget.”

“Wish, by gor! whale eat him, ’stead of him eat whale. I’m bressed if
he ain’t more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself,” muttered the old man,
limping away; with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock.


CHAPTER 65. The Whale as a Dish.

That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp, and,
like Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems so
outlandish a thing that one must needs go a little into the history and
philosophy of it.

It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right
Whale was esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large
prices there. Also, that in Henry VIIIth’s time, a certain cook of the
court obtained a handsome reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be
eaten with barbacued porpoises, which, you remember, are a species of
whale. Porpoises, indeed, are to this day considered fine eating. The
meat is made into balls about the size of billiard balls, and being
well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-balls or veal balls.
The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them. They had a great
porpoise grant from the crown.

The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all
hands be considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but
when you come to sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet
long, it takes away your appetite. Only the most unprejudiced of men
like Stubb, nowadays partake of cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are
not so fastidious. We all know how they live upon whales, and have rare
old vintages of prime old train oil. Zogranda, one of their most famous
doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as being exceedingly
juicy and nourishing. And this reminds me that certain Englishmen, who
long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling vessel—that
these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps of
whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber. Among
the Dutch whalemen these scraps are called “fritters”; which, indeed,
they greatly resemble, being brown and crisp, and smelling something
like old Amsterdam housewives’ dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh.
They have such an eatable look that the most self-denying stranger can
hardly keep his hands off.

But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his
exceeding richness. He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to be
delicately good. Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating as the
buffalo’s (which is esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a solid
pyramid of fat. But the spermaceti itself, how bland and creamy that
is; like the transparent, half-jellied, white meat of a cocoanut in the
third month of its growth, yet far too rich to supply a substitute for
butter. Nevertheless, many whalemen have a method of absorbing it into
some other substance, and then partaking of it. In the long try watches
of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip their
ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile. Many
a good supper have I thus made.

In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine
dish. The casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the two
plump, whitish lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two large
puddings), they are then mixed with flour, and cooked into a most
delectable mess, in flavor somewhat resembling calves’ head, which is
quite a dish among some epicures; and every one knows that some young
bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon calves’ brains, by
and by get to have a little brains of their own, so as to be able to
tell a calf’s head from their own heads; which, indeed, requires
uncommon discrimination. And that is the reason why a young buck with
an intelligent looking calf’s head before him, is somehow one of the
saddest sights you can see. The head looks a sort of reproachfully at
him, with an “Et tu Brute!” expression.

It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively
unctuous that landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with
abhorrence; that appears to result, in some way, from the consideration
before mentioned: _i.e._ that a man should eat a newly murdered thing
of the sea, and eat it too by its own light. But no doubt the first man
that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a murderer; perhaps he was
hung; and if he had been put on his trial by oxen, he certainly would
have been; and he certainly deserved it if any murderer does. Go to the
meat-market of a Saturday night and see the crowds of live bipeds
staring up at the long rows of dead quadrupeds. Does not that sight
take a tooth out of the cannibal’s jaw? Cannibals? who is not a
cannibal? I tell you it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that
salted down a lean missionary in his cellar against a coming famine; it
will be more tolerable for that provident Fejee, I say, in the day of
judgment, than for thee, civilized and enlightened gourmand, who
nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their bloated livers in thy
paté-de-foie-gras.

But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is
adding insult to injury, is it? Look at your knife-handle, there, my
civilized and enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what is
that handle made of?—what but the bones of the brother of the very ox
you are eating? And what do you pick your teeth with, after devouring
that fat goose? With a feather of the same fowl. And with what quill
did the Secretary of the Society for the Suppression of Cruelty to
Ganders formally indite his circulars? It is only within the last month
or two that that society passed a resolution to patronize nothing but
steel pens.


CHAPTER 66. The Shark Massacre.

When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and
weary toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a general
thing at least, customary to proceed at once to the business of cutting
him in. For that business is an exceedingly laborious one; is not very
soon completed; and requires all hands to set about it. Therefore, the
common usage is to take in all sail; lash the helm a’lee; and then send
every one below to his hammock till daylight, with the reservation
that, until that time, anchor-watches shall be kept; that is, two and
two for an hour, each couple, the crew in rotation shall mount the deck
to see that all goes well.

But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan will
not answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks gather
round the moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours, say, on a
stretch, little more than the skeleton would be visible by morning. In
most other parts of the ocean, however, where these fish do not so
largely abound, their wondrous voracity can be at times considerably
diminished, by vigorously stirring them up with sharp whaling-spades, a
procedure notwithstanding, which, in some instances, only seems to
tickle them into still greater activity. But it was not thus in the
present case with the Pequod’s sharks; though, to be sure, any man
unaccustomed to such sights, to have looked over her side that night,
would have almost thought the whole round sea was one huge cheese, and
those sharks the maggots in it.

Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper was
concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle seaman came
on deck, no small excitement was created among the sharks; for
immediately suspending the cutting stages over the side, and lowering
three lanterns, so that they cast long gleams of light over the turbid
sea, these two mariners, darting their long whaling-spades, kept up an
incessant murdering of the sharks,* by striking the keen steel deep
into their skulls, seemingly their only vital part. But in the foamy
confusion of their mixed and struggling hosts, the marksmen could not
always hit their mark; and this brought about new revelations of the
incredible ferocity of the foe. They viciously snapped, not only at
each other’s disembowelments, but like flexible bows, bent round, and
bit their own; till those entrails seemed swallowed over and over again
by the same mouth, to be oppositely voided by the gaping wound. Nor was
this all. It was unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these
creatures. A sort of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in
their very joints and bones, after what might be called the individual
life had departed. Killed and hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin,
one of these sharks almost took poor Queequeg’s hand off, when he tried
to shut down the dead lid of his murderous jaw.

*The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best steel;
is about the bigness of a man’s spread hand; and in general shape,
corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named; only its
sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably narrower than
the lower. This weapon is always kept as sharp as possible; and when
being used is occasionally honed, just like a razor. In its socket, a
stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long, is inserted for a handle.

“Queequeg no care what god made him shark,” said the savage,
agonizingly lifting his hand up and down; “wedder Fejee god or
Nantucket god; but de god wat made shark must be one dam Ingin.”


CHAPTER 67. Cutting In.

It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed! Ex officio
professors of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen. The ivory Pequod was
turned into what seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher. You would
have thought we were offering up ten thousand red oxen to the sea gods.

In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other ponderous
things comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted green, and
which no single man can possibly lift—this vast bunch of grapes was
swayed up to the main-top and firmly lashed to the lower mast-head, the
strongest point anywhere above a ship’s deck. The end of the
hawser-like rope winding through these intricacies, was then conducted
to the windlass, and the huge lower block of the tackles was swung over
the whale; to this block the great blubber hook, weighing some one
hundred pounds, was attached. And now suspended in stages over the
side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their long spades,
began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of the hook just
above the nearest of the two side-fins. This done, a broad,
semicircular line is cut round the hole, the hook is inserted, and the
main body of the crew striking up a wild chorus, now commence heaving
in one dense crowd at the windlass. When instantly, the entire ship
careens over on her side; every bolt in her starts like the nail-heads
of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles, quivers, and nods her
frighted mast-heads to the sky. More and more she leans over to the
whale, while every gasping heave of the windlass is answered by a
helping heave from the billows; till at last, a swift, startling snap
is heard; with a great swash the ship rolls upwards and backwards from
the whale, and the triumphant tackle rises into sight dragging after it
the disengaged semicircular end of the first strip of blubber. Now as
the blubber envelopes the whale precisely as the rind does an orange,
so is it stripped off from the body precisely as an orange is sometimes
stripped by spiralizing it. For the strain constantly kept up by the
windlass continually keeps the whale rolling over and over in the
water, and as the blubber in one strip uniformly peels off along the
line called the “scarf,” simultaneously cut by the spades of Starbuck
and Stubb, the mates; and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and
indeed by that very act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher
and higher aloft till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the
windlass then cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious
blood-dripping mass sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and
every one present must take good heed to dodge it when it swings, else
it may box his ears and pitch him headlong overboard.

One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen weapon
called a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he dexterously slices
out a considerable hole in the lower part of the swaying mass. Into
this hole, the end of the second alternating great tackle is then
hooked so as to retain a hold upon the blubber, in order to prepare for
what follows. Whereupon, this accomplished swordsman, warning all hands
to stand off, once more makes a scientific dash at the mass, and with a
few sidelong, desperate, lunging slicings, severs it completely in
twain; so that while the short lower part is still fast, the long upper
strip, called a blanket-piece, swings clear, and is all ready for
lowering. The heavers forward now resume their song, and while the one
tackle is peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the other
is slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the
main hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the
blubber-room. Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep
coiling away the long blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass of
plaited serpents. And thus the work proceeds; the two tackles hoisting
and lowering simultaneously; both whale and windlass heaving, the
heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen coiling, the mates
scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearing occasionally, by
way of assuaging the general friction.


CHAPTER 68. The Blanket.

I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skin
of the whale. I have had controversies about it with experienced
whalemen afloat, and learned naturalists ashore. My original opinion
remains unchanged; but it is only an opinion.

The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale? Already you
know what his blubber is. That blubber is something of the consistence
of firm, close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic and compact, and
ranges from eight or ten to twelve and fifteen inches in thickness.

Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any
creature’s skin as being of that sort of consistence and thickness, yet
in point of fact these are no arguments against such a presumption;
because you cannot raise any other dense enveloping layer from the
whale’s body but that same blubber; and the outermost enveloping layer
of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can that be but the skin?
True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you may scrape off with
your hand an infinitely thin, transparent substance, somewhat
resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, only it is almost as
flexible and soft as satin; that is, previous to being dried, when it
not only contracts and thickens, but becomes rather hard and brittle. I
have several such dried bits, which I use for marks in my whale-books.
It is transparent, as I said before; and being laid upon the printed
page, I have sometimes pleased myself with fancying it exerted a
magnifying influence. At any rate, it is pleasant to read about whales
through their own spectacles, as you may say. But what I am driving at
here is this. That same infinitely thin, isinglass substance, which, I
admit, invests the entire body of the whale, is not so much to be
regarded as the skin of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to
speak; for it were simply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of
the tremendous whale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a
new-born child. But no more of this.

Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this skin,
as in the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk of one
hundred barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, in quantity,
or rather weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is only three
fourths, and not the entire substance of the coat; some idea may hence
be had of the enormousness of that animated mass, a mere part of whose
mere integument yields such a lake of liquid as that. Reckoning ten
barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the net weight of only three
quarters of the stuff of the whale’s skin.

In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the least among
the many marvels he presents. Almost invariably it is all over
obliquely crossed and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in
thick array, something like those in the finest Italian line
engravings. But these marks do not seem to be impressed upon the
isinglass substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen through it, as
if they were engraved upon the body itself. Nor is this all. In some
instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks, as in a
veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far other delineations.
These are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call those mysterious cyphers
on the walls of pyramids hieroglyphics, then that is the proper word to
use in the present connexion. By my retentive memory of the
hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in particular, I was much struck
with a plate representing the old Indian characters chiselled on the
famous hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of the Upper Mississippi.
Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked whale remains
undecipherable. This allusion to the Indian rocks reminds me of another
thing. Besides all the other phenomena which the exterior of the Sperm
Whale presents, he not seldom displays the back, and more especially
his flanks, effaced in great part of the regular linear appearance, by
reason of numerous rude scratches, altogether of an irregular, random
aspect. I should say that those New England rocks on the sea-coast,
which Agassiz imagines to bear the marks of violent scraping contact
with vast floating icebergs—I should say, that those rocks must not a
little resemble the Sperm Whale in this particular. It also seems to me
that such scratches in the whale are probably made by hostile contact
with other whales; for I have most remarked them in the large,
full-grown bulls of the species.

A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber of the
whale. It has already been said, that it is stript from him in long
pieces, called blanket-pieces. Like most sea-terms, this one is very
happy and significant. For the whale is indeed wrapt up in his blubber
as in a real blanket or counterpane; or, still better, an Indian poncho
slipt over his head, and skirting his extremity. It is by reason of
this cosy blanketing of his body, that the whale is enabled to keep
himself comfortable in all weathers, in all seas, times, and tides.
What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in those shuddering, icy
seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosy surtout? True, other
fish are found exceedingly brisk in those Hyperborean waters; but
these, be it observed, are your cold-blooded, lungless fish, whose very
bellies are refrigerators; creatures, that warm themselves under the
lee of an iceberg, as a traveller in winter would bask before an inn
fire; whereas, like man, the whale has lungs and warm blood. Freeze his
blood, and he dies. How wonderful is it then—except after
explanation—that this great monster, to whom corporeal warmth is as
indispensable as it is to man; how wonderful that he should be found at
home, immersed to his lips for life in those Arctic waters! where, when
seamen fall overboard, they are sometimes found, months afterwards,
perpendicularly frozen into the hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is
found glued in amber. But more surprising is it to know, as has been
proved by experiment, that the blood of a Polar whale is warmer than
that of a Borneo negro in summer.

It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strong
individual vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare
virtue of interior spaciousness. Oh, man! admire and model thyself
after the whale! Do thou, too, remain warm among ice. Do thou, too,
live in this world without being of it. Be cool at the equator; keep
thy blood fluid at the Pole. Like the great dome of St. Peter’s, and
like the great whale, retain, O man! in all seasons a temperature of
thine own.

But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things! Of erections,
how few are domed like St. Peter’s! of creatures, how few vast as the
whale!


CHAPTER 69. The Funeral.

“Haul in the chains! Let the carcase go astern!”

The vast tackles have now done their duty. The peeled white body of the
beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in hue,
it has not perceptibly lost anything in bulk. It is still colossal.
Slowly it floats more and more away, the water round it torn and
splashed by the insatiate sharks, and the air above vexed with
rapacious flights of screaming fowls, whose beaks are like so many
insulting poniards in the whale. The vast white headless phantom floats
further and further from the ship, and every rod that it so floats,
what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls, augment the
murderous din. For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship that
hideous sight is seen. Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky, upon
the fair face of the pleasant sea, wafted by the joyous breezes, that
great mass of death floats on and on, till lost in infinite
perspectives.

There’s a most doleful and most mocking funeral! The sea-vultures all
in pious mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or
speckled. In life but few of them would have helped the whale, I ween,
if peradventure he had needed it; but upon the banquet of his funeral
they most piously do pounce. Oh, horrible vultureism of earth! from
which not the mightiest whale is free.

Nor is this the end. Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghost
survives and hovers over it to scare. Espied by some timid man-of-war
or blundering discovery-vessel from afar, when the distance obscuring
the swarming fowls, nevertheless still shows the white mass floating in
the sun, and the white spray heaving high against it; straightway the
whale’s unharming corpse, with trembling fingers is set down in the
log—_shoals, rocks, and breakers hereabouts: beware!_ And for years
afterwards, perhaps, ships shun the place; leaping over it as silly
sheep leap over a vacuum, because their leader originally leaped there
when a stick was held. There’s your law of precedents; there’s your
utility of traditions; there’s the story of your obstinate survival of
old beliefs never bottomed on the earth, and now not even hovering in
the air! There’s orthodoxy!

Thus, while in life the great whale’s body may have been a real terror
to his foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a
world.

Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend? There are other ghosts than
the Cock-Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe
in them.


CHAPTER 70. The Sphynx.

It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping
the body of the leviathan, he was beheaded. Now, the beheading of the
Sperm Whale is a scientific anatomical feat, upon which experienced
whale surgeons very much pride themselves: and not without reason.

Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck;
on the contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there, in that
very place, is the thickest part of him. Remember, also, that the
surgeon must operate from above, some eight or ten feet intervening
between him and his subject, and that subject almost hidden in a
discoloured, rolling, and oftentimes tumultuous and bursting sea. Bear
in mind, too, that under these untoward circumstances he has to cut
many feet deep in the flesh; and in that subterraneous manner, without
so much as getting one single peep into the ever-contracting gash thus
made, he must skilfully steer clear of all adjacent, interdicted parts,
and exactly divide the spine at a critical point hard by its insertion
into the skull. Do you not marvel, then, at Stubb’s boast, that he
demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale?

When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a
cable till the body is stripped. That done, if it belong to a small
whale it is hoisted on deck to be deliberately disposed of. But, with a
full grown leviathan this is impossible; for the sperm whale’s head
embraces nearly one third of his entire bulk, and completely to suspend
such a burden as that, even by the immense tackles of a whaler, this
were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing a Dutch barn in jewellers’
scales.

The Pequod’s whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the head
was hoisted against the ship’s side—about half way out of the sea, so
that it might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element. And
there with the strained craft steeply leaning over to it, by reason of
the enormous downward drag from the lower mast-head, and every yard-arm
on that side projecting like a crane over the waves; there, that
blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod’s waist like the giant
Holofernes’s from the girdle of Judith.

When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen went
below to their dinner. Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but
now deserted deck. An intense copper calm, like a universal yellow
lotus, was more and more unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves
upon the sea.

A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone
from his cabin. Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused to
gaze over the side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he took
Stubb’s long spade—still remaining there after the whale’s
decapitation—and striking it into the lower part of the half-suspended
mass, placed its other end crutch-wise under one arm, and so stood
leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on this head.

It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so
intense a calm, it seemed the Sphynx’s in the desert. “Speak, thou vast
and venerable head,” muttered Ahab, “which, though ungarnished with a
beard, yet here and there lookest hoary with mosses; speak, mighty
head, and tell us the secret thing that is in thee. Of all divers, thou
hast dived the deepest. That head upon which the upper sun now gleams,
has moved amid this world’s foundations. Where unrecorded names and
navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot; where in her murderous
hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of millions of the
drowned; there, in that awful water-land, there was thy most familiar
home. Thou hast been where bell or diver never went; hast slept by many
a sailor’s side, where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay
them down. Thou saw’st the locked lovers when leaping from their
flaming ship; heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave; true
to each other, when heaven seemed false to them. Thou saw’st the
murdered mate when tossed by pirates from the midnight deck; for hours
he fell into the deeper midnight of the insatiate maw; and his
murderers still sailed on unharmed—while swift lightnings shivered the
neighboring ship that would have borne a righteous husband to
outstretched, longing arms. O head! thou hast seen enough to split the
planets and make an infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!”

“Sail ho!” cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.

“Aye? Well, now, that’s cheering,” cried Ahab, suddenly erecting
himself, while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow. “That
lively cry upon this deadly calm might almost convert a better
man.—Where away?”

“Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breeze
to us!

“Better and better, man. Would now St. Paul would come along that way,
and to my breezelessness bring his breeze! O Nature, and O soul of man!
how far beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! not the
smallest atom stirs or lives on matter, but has its cunning duplicate
in mind.”


CHAPTER 71. The Jeroboam’s Story.

Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster than
the ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.

By and by, through the glass the stranger’s boats and manned mast-heads
proved her a whale-ship. But as she was so far to windward, and
shooting by, apparently making a passage to some other ground, the
Pequod could not hope to reach her. So the signal was set to see what
response would be made.

Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the ships
of the American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all which
signals being collected in a book with the names of the respective
vessels attached, every captain is provided with it. Thereby, the whale
commanders are enabled to recognise each other upon the ocean, even at
considerable distances and with no small facility.

The Pequod’s signal was at last responded to by the stranger’s setting
her own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam of Nantucket.
Squaring her yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under the Pequod’s lee,
and lowered a boat; it soon drew nigh; but, as the side-ladder was
being rigged by Starbuck’s order to accommodate the visiting captain,
the stranger in question waved his hand from his boat’s stern in token
of that proceeding being entirely unnecessary. It turned out that the
Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on board, and that Mayhew, her
captain, was fearful of infecting the Pequod’s company. For, though
himself and boat’s crew remained untainted, and though his ship was
half a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible sea and air rolling and
flowing between; yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine
of the land, he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with
the Pequod.

But this did by no means prevent all communications. Preserving an
interval of some few yards between itself and the ship, the Jeroboam’s
boat by the occasional use of its oars contrived to keep parallel to
the Pequod, as she heavily forged through the sea (for by this time it
blew very fresh), with her main-topsail aback; though, indeed, at times
by the sudden onset of a large rolling wave, the boat would be pushed
some way ahead; but would be soon skilfully brought to her proper
bearings again. Subject to this, and other the like interruptions now
and then, a conversation was sustained between the two parties; but at
intervals not without still another interruption of a very different
sort.

Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam’s boat, was a man of a singular
appearance, even in that wild whaling life where individual
notabilities make up all totalities. He was a small, short, youngish
man, sprinkled all over his face with freckles, and wearing redundant
yellow hair. A long-skirted, cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut
tinge enveloped him; the overlapping sleeves of which were rolled up on
his wrists. A deep, settled, fanatic delirium was in his eyes.

So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had
exclaimed—“That’s he! that’s he!—the long-togged scaramouch the
Town-Ho’s company told us of!” Stubb here alluded to a strange story
told of the Jeroboam, and a certain man among her crew, some time
previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho. According to this account
and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that the scaramouch in
question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost everybody in the
Jeroboam. His story was this:

He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna
Shakers, where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secret
meetings having several times descended from heaven by the way of a
trap-door, announcing the speedy opening of the seventh vial, which he
carried in his vest-pocket; but, which, instead of containing
gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with laudanum. A strange,
apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna for Nantucket,
where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed a steady,
common-sense exterior, and offered himself as a green-hand candidate
for the Jeroboam’s whaling voyage. They engaged him; but straightway
upon the ship’s getting out of sight of land, his insanity broke out in
a freshet. He announced himself as the archangel Gabriel, and commanded
the captain to jump overboard. He published his manifesto, whereby he
set himself forth as the deliverer of the isles of the sea and
vicar-general of all Oceanica. The unflinching earnestness with which
he declared these things;—the dark, daring play of his sleepless,
excited imagination, and all the preternatural terrors of real
delirium, united to invest this Gabriel in the minds of the majority of
the ignorant crew, with an atmosphere of sacredness. Moreover, they
were afraid of him. As such a man, however, was not of much practical
use in the ship, especially as he refused to work except when he
pleased, the incredulous captain would fain have been rid of him; but
apprised that that individual’s intention was to land him in the first
convenient port, the archangel forthwith opened all his seals and
vials—devoting the ship and all hands to unconditional perdition, in
case this intention was carried out. So strongly did he work upon his
disciples among the crew, that at last in a body they went to the
captain and told him if Gabriel was sent from the ship, not a man of
them would remain. He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan. Nor
would they permit Gabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he
would; so that it came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of
the ship. The consequence of all this was, that the archangel cared
little or nothing for the captain and mates; and since the epidemic had
broken out, he carried a higher hand than ever; declaring that the
plague, as he called it, was at his sole command; nor should it be
stayed but according to his good pleasure. The sailors, mostly poor
devils, cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in obedience to
his instructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to a god.
Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are true.
Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the
measureless self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his measureless
power of deceiving and bedevilling so many others. But it is time to
return to the Pequod.

“I fear not thy epidemic, man,” said Ahab from the bulwarks, to Captain
Mayhew, who stood in the boat’s stern; “come on board.”

But now Gabriel started to his feet.

“Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious! Beware of the horrible
plague!”

“Gabriel! Gabriel!” cried Captain Mayhew; “thou must either—” But that
instant a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and its seethings
drowned all speech.

“Hast thou seen the White Whale?” demanded Ahab, when the boat drifted
back.

“Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk! Beware of the
horrible tail!”

“I tell thee again, Gabriel, that—” But again the boat tore ahead as if
dragged by fiends. Nothing was said for some moments, while a
succession of riotous waves rolled by, which by one of those occasional
caprices of the seas were tumbling, not heaving it. Meantime, the
hoisted sperm whale’s head jogged about very violently, and Gabriel was
seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness than his archangel
nature seemed to warrant.

When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark story
concerning Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent interruptions from
Gabriel, whenever his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea that seemed
leagued with him.

It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when upon speaking
a whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of the existence of
Moby Dick, and the havoc he had made. Greedily sucking in this
intelligence, Gabriel solemnly warned the captain against attacking the
White Whale, in case the monster should be seen; in his gibbering
insanity, pronouncing the White Whale to be no less a being than the
Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving the Bible. But when, some
year or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted from the
mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ardour to encounter him;
and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the
opportunity, despite all the archangel’s denunciations and
forewarnings, Macey succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat.
With them he pushed off; and, after much weary pulling, and many
perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at last succeeded in getting one iron
fast. Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the main-royal mast-head, was
tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling forth prophecies of
speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his divinity. Now, while
Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat’s bow, and with all the
reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations upon the
whale, and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance, lo! a
broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its quick, fanning motion,
temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen. Next
instant, the luckless mate, so full of furious life, was smitten bodily
into the air, and making a long arc in his descent, fell into the sea
at the distance of about fifty yards. Not a chip of the boat was
harmed, nor a hair of any oarsman’s head; but the mate for ever sank.

It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in the
Sperm-Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any.
Sometimes, nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated;
oftener the boat’s bow is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in which the
headsman stands, is torn from its place and accompanies the body. But
strangest of all is the circumstance, that in more instances than one,
when the body has been recovered, not a single mark of violence is
discernible; the man being stark dead.

The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainly
descried from the ship. Raising a piercing shriek—“The vial! the vial!”
Gabriel called off the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of
the whale. This terrible event clothed the archangel with added
influence; because his credulous disciples believed that he had
specifically fore-announced it, instead of only making a general
prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced to hit one
of many marks in the wide margin allowed. He became a nameless terror
to the ship.

Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions to him,
that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he
intended to hunt the White Whale, if opportunity should offer. To which
Ahab answered—“Aye.” Straightway, then, Gabriel once more started to
his feet, glaring upon the old man, and vehemently exclaimed, with
downward pointed finger—“Think, think of the blasphemer—dead, and down
there!—beware of the blasphemer’s end!”

Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, “Captain, I have just
bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thy
officers, if I mistake not. Starbuck, look over the bag.”

Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various
ships, whose delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed,
depends upon the mere chance of encountering them in the four oceans.
Thus, most letters never reach their mark; and many are only received
after attaining an age of two or three years or more.

Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand. It was sorely
tumbled, damp, and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in
consequence of being kept in a dark locker of the cabin. Of such a
letter, Death himself might well have been the post-boy.

“Can’st not read it?” cried Ahab. “Give it me, man. Aye, aye, it’s but
a dim scrawl;—what’s this?” As he was studying it out, Starbuck took a
long cutting-spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the end, to
insert the letter there, and in that way, hand it to the boat, without
its coming any closer to the ship.

Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, “Mr. Har—yes, Mr. Harry—(a
woman’s pinny hand,—the man’s wife, I’ll wager)—Aye—Mr. Harry Macey,
Ship Jeroboam;—why it’s Macey, and he’s dead!”

“Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife,” sighed Mayhew; “but let
me have it.”

“Nay, keep it thyself,” cried Gabriel to Ahab; “thou art soon going
that way.”

“Curses throttle thee!” yelled Ahab. “Captain Mayhew, stand by now to
receive it”; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck’s hands, he
caught it in the slit of the pole, and reached it over towards the
boat. But as he did so, the oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing;
the boat drifted a little towards the ship’s stern; so that, as if by
magic, the letter suddenly ranged along with Gabriel’s eager hand. He
clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-knife, and impaling the
letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship. It fell at Ahab’s
feet. Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way with their
oars, and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from the
Pequod.

As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket
of the whale, many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild
affair.


CHAPTER 72. The Monkey-Rope.

In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale,
there is much running backwards and forwards among the crew. Now hands
are wanted here, and then again hands are wanted there. There is no
staying in any one place; for at one and the same time everything has
to be done everywhere. It is much the same with him who endeavors the
description of the scene. We must now retrace our way a little. It was
mentioned that upon first breaking ground in the whale’s back, the
blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there cut by the
spades of the mates. But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as that
same hook get fixed in that hole? It was inserted there by my
particular friend Queequeg, whose duty it was, as harpooneer, to
descend upon the monster’s back for the special purpose referred to.
But in very many cases, circumstances require that the harpooneer shall
remain on the whale till the whole flensing or stripping operation is
concluded. The whale, be it observed, lies almost entirely submerged,
excepting the immediate parts operated upon. So down there, some ten
feet below the level of the deck, the poor harpooneer flounders about,
half on the whale and half in the water, as the vast mass revolves like
a tread-mill beneath him. On the occasion in question, Queequeg figured
in the Highland costume—a shirt and socks—in which to my eyes, at
least, he appeared to uncommon advantage; and no one had a better
chance to observe him, as will presently be seen.

Being the savage’s bowsman, that is, the person who pulled the bow-oar
in his boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerful duty to
attend upon him while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead
whale’s back. You have seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by
a long cord. Just so, from the ship’s steep side, did I hold Queequeg
down there in the sea, by what is technically called in the fishery a
monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of canvas belted round his
waist.

It was a humorously perilous business for both of us. For, before we
proceed further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both
ends; fast to Queequeg’s broad canvas belt, and fast to my narrow
leather one. So that for better or for worse, we two, for the time,
were wedded; and should poor Queequeg sink to rise no more, then both
usage and honor demanded, that instead of cutting the cord, it should
drag me down in his wake. So, then, an elongated Siamese ligature
united us. Queequeg was my own inseparable twin brother; nor could I
any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the hempen bond
entailed.

So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then,
that while earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly to
perceive that my own individuality was now merged in a joint stock
company of two; that my free will had received a mortal wound; and that
another’s mistake or misfortune might plunge innocent me into unmerited
disaster and death. Therefore, I saw that here was a sort of
interregnum in Providence; for its even-handed equity never could have
so gross an injustice. And yet still further pondering—while I jerked
him now and then from between the whale and ship, which would threaten
to jam him—still further pondering, I say, I saw that this situation of
mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes; only, in
most cases, he, one way or other, has this Siamese connexion with a
plurality of other mortals. If your banker breaks, you snap; if your
apothecary by mistake sends you poison in your pills, you die. True,
you may say that, by exceeding caution, you may possibly escape these
and the multitudinous other evil chances of life. But handle Queequeg’s
monkey-rope heedfully as I would, sometimes he jerked it so, that I
came very near sliding overboard. Nor could I possibly forget that, do
what I would, I only had the management of one end of it.*

*The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the Pequod
that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together. This
improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man
than Stubb, in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongest
possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his
monkey-rope holder.

I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the
whale and the ship—where he would occasionally fall, from the incessant
rolling and swaying of both. But this was not the only jamming jeopardy
he was exposed to. Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the
night, the sharks now freshly and more keenly allured by the before
pent blood which began to flow from the carcass—the rabid creatures
swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.

And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed them
aside with his floundering feet. A thing altogether incredible were it
not that attracted by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwise
miscellaneously carnivorous shark will seldom touch a man.

Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such a
ravenous finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to
them. Accordingly, besides the monkey-rope, with which I now and then
jerked the poor fellow from too close a vicinity to the maw of what
seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark—he was provided with still another
protection. Suspended over the side in one of the stages, Tashtego and
Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple of keen
whale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could
reach. This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very disinterested and
benevolent of them. They meant Queequeg’s best happiness, I admit; but
in their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from the circumstance that
both he and the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled
water, those indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a
leg than a tail. But poor Queequeg, I suppose, straining and gasping
there with that great iron hook—poor Queequeg, I suppose, only prayed
to his Yojo, and gave up his life into the hands of his gods.

Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew in
and then slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea—what matters
it, after all? Are you not the precious image of each and all of us men
in this whaling world? That unsounded ocean you gasp in, is Life; those
sharks, your foes; those spades, your friends; and what between sharks
and spades you are in a sad pickle and peril, poor lad.

But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg. For now,
as with blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last
climbs up the chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily
trembling over the side; the steward advances, and with a benevolent,
consolatory glance hands him—what? Some hot Cognac? No! hands him, ye
gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and water!

“Ginger? Do I smell ginger?” suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near.
“Yes, this must be ginger,” peering into the as yet untasted cup. Then
standing as if incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towards the
astonished steward slowly saying, “Ginger? ginger? and will you have
the goodness to tell me, Mr. Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue of
ginger? Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel you use, Dough-boy, to
kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal? Ginger!—what the devil is
ginger? Sea-coal? firewood?—lucifer matches?—tinder?—gunpowder?—what
the devil is ginger, I say, that you offer this cup to our poor
Queequeg here.”

“There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this
business,” he suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had just
come from forward. “Will you look at that kannakin, sir: smell of it,
if you please.” Then watching the mate’s countenance, he added, “The
steward, Mr. Starbuck, had the face to offer that calomel and jalap to
Queequeg, there, this instant off the whale. Is the steward an
apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the sort of bitters by
which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?”

“I trust not,” said Starbuck, “it is poor stuff enough.”

“Aye, aye, steward,” cried Stubb, “we’ll teach you to drug a
harpooneer; none of your apothecary’s medicine here; you want to poison
us, do ye? You have got out insurances on our lives and want to murder
us all, and pocket the proceeds, do ye?”

“It was not me,” cried Dough-Boy, “it was Aunt Charity that brought the
ginger on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits,
but only this ginger-jub—so she called it.”

“Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with ye to
the lockers, and get something better. I hope I do no wrong, Mr.
Starbuck. It is the captain’s orders—grog for the harpooneer on a
whale.”

“Enough,” replied Starbuck, “only don’t hit him again, but—”

“Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale or something of
that sort; and this fellow’s a weazel. What were you about saying,
sir?”

“Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself.”

When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a
sort of tea-caddy in the other. The first contained strong spirits, and
was handed to Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity’s gift, and that
was freely given to the waves.


CHAPTER 73. Stubb and Flask kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk
over Him.

It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale’s
prodigious head hanging to the Pequod’s side. But we must let it
continue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to attend to
it. For the present other matters press, and the best we can do now for
the head, is to pray heaven the tackles may hold.

Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradually
drifted into a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit,
gave unusual tokens of the vicinity of Right Whales, a species of the
Leviathan that but few supposed to be at this particular time lurking
anywhere near. And though all hands commonly disdained the capture of
those inferior creatures; and though the Pequod was not commissioned to
cruise for them at all, and though she had passed numbers of them near
the Crozetts without lowering a boat; yet now that a Sperm Whale had
been brought alongside and beheaded, to the surprise of all, the
announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day,
if opportunity offered.

Nor was this long wanting. Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and two
boats, Stubb’s and Flask’s, were detached in pursuit. Pulling further
and further away, they at last became almost invisible to the men at
the mast-head. But suddenly in the distance, they saw a great heap of
tumultuous white water, and soon after news came from aloft that one or
both the boats must be fast. An interval passed and the boats were in
plain sight, in the act of being dragged right towards the ship by the
towing whale. So close did the monster come to the hull, that at first
it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenly going down in a
maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly disappeared from
view, as if diving under the keel. “Cut, cut!” was the cry from the
ship to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on the point of being
brought with a deadly dash against the vessel’s side. But having plenty
of line yet in the tubs, and the whale not sounding very rapidly, they
paid out abundance of rope, and at the same time pulled with all their
might so as to get ahead of the ship. For a few minutes the struggle
was intensely critical; for while they still slacked out the tightened
line in one direction, and still plied their oars in another, the
contending strain threatened to take them under. But it was only a few
feet advance they sought to gain. And they stuck to it till they did
gain it; when instantly, a swift tremor was felt running like lightning
along the keel, as the strained line, scraping beneath the ship,
suddenly rose to view under her bows, snapping and quivering; and so
flinging off its drippings, that the drops fell like bits of broken
glass on the water, while the whale beyond also rose to sight, and once
more the boats were free to fly. But the fagged whale abated his speed,
and blindly altering his course, went round the stern of the ship
towing the two boats after him, so that they performed a complete
circuit.

Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close
flanking him on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance;
and thus round and round the Pequod the battle went, while the
multitudes of sharks that had before swum round the Sperm Whale’s body,
rushed to the fresh blood that was spilled, thirstily drinking at every
new gash, as the eager Israelites did at the new bursting fountains
that poured from the smitten rock.

At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, he
turned upon his back a corpse.

While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes,
and in other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing, some
conversation ensued between them.

“I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard,” said
Stubb, not without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so
ignoble a leviathan.

“Wants with it?” said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat’s bow,
“did you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale’s
head hoisted on her starboard side, and at the same time a Right
Whale’s on the larboard; did you never hear, Stubb, that that ship can
never afterwards capsize?”

“Why not?

“I don’t know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so,
and he seems to know all about ships’ charms. But I sometimes think
he’ll charm the ship to no good at last. I don’t half like that chap,
Stubb. Did you ever notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved
into a snake’s head, Stubb?”

“Sink him! I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance of a
dark night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by; look
down there, Flask”—pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both
hands—“Aye, will I! Flask, I take that Fedallah to be the devil in
disguise. Do you believe that cock and bull story about his having been
stowed away on board ship? He’s the devil, I say. The reason why you
don’t see his tail, is because he tucks it up out of sight; he carries
it coiled away in his pocket, I guess. Blast him! now that I think of
it, he’s always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes of his boots.”

“He sleeps in his boots, don’t he? He hasn’t got any hammock; but I’ve
seen him lay of nights in a coil of rigging.”

“No doubt, and it’s because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, do ye
see, in the eye of the rigging.”

“What’s the old man have so much to do with him for?”

“Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose.”

“Bargain?—about what?”

“Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, and
the devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap away
his silver watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and then
he’ll surrender Moby Dick.”

“Pooh! Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?”

“I don’t know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wicked
one, I tell ye. Why, they say as how he went a sauntering into the old
flag-ship once, switching his tail about devilish easy and
gentlemanlike, and inquiring if the old governor was at home. Well, he
was at home, and asked the devil what he wanted. The devil, switching
his hoofs, up and says, ‘I want John.’ ‘What for?’ says the old
governor. ‘What business is that of yours,’ says the devil, getting
mad,—‘I want to use him.’ ‘Take him,’ says the governor—and by the
Lord, Flask, if the devil didn’t give John the Asiatic cholera before
he got through with him, I’ll eat this whale in one mouthful. But look
sharp—ain’t you all ready there? Well, then, pull ahead, and let’s get
the whale alongside.”

“I think I remember some such story as you were telling,” said Flask,
when at last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden
towards the ship, “but I can’t remember where.”

“Three Spaniards? Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes?
Did ye read it there, Flask? I guess ye did?”

“No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though. But now, tell me,
Stubb, do you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now, was
the same you say is now on board the Pequod?”

“Am I the same man that helped kill this whale? Doesn’t the devil live
for ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead? Did you ever see any
parson a wearing mourning for the devil? And if the devil has a
latch-key to get into the admiral’s cabin, don’t you suppose he can
crawl into a porthole? Tell me that, Mr. Flask?”

“How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?”

“Do you see that mainmast there?” pointing to the ship; “well, that’s
the figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod’s hold, and string
along in a row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well, that
wouldn’t begin to be Fedallah’s age. Nor all the coopers in creation
couldn’t show hoops enough to make oughts enough.”

“But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now, that you
meant to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance. Now, if
he’s so old as all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is going to
live for ever, what good will it do to pitch him overboard—tell me
that?

“Give him a good ducking, anyhow.”

“But he’d crawl back.”

“Duck him again; and keep ducking him.”

“Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though—yes, and
drown you—what then?”

“I should like to see him try it; I’d give him such a pair of black
eyes that he wouldn’t dare to show his face in the admiral’s cabin
again for a long while, let alone down in the orlop there, where he
lives, and hereabouts on the upper decks where he sneaks so much. Damn
the devil, Flask; so you suppose I’m afraid of the devil? Who’s afraid
of him, except the old governor who daresn’t catch him and put him in
double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him go about kidnapping
people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the people the devil
kidnapped, he’d roast for him? There’s a governor!”

“Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?”

“Do I suppose it? You’ll know it before long, Flask. But I am going now
to keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything very suspicious
going on, I’ll just take him by the nape of his neck, and say—Look
here, Beelzebub, you don’t do it; and if he makes any fuss, by the Lord
I’ll make a grab into his pocket for his tail, take it to the capstan,
and give him such a wrenching and heaving, that his tail will come
short off at the stump—do you see; and then, I rather guess when he
finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he’ll sneak off without the
poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs.”

“And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?”

“Do with it? Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;—what else?”

“Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along, Stubb?”

“Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship.”

The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side,
where fluke chains and other necessaries were already prepared for
securing him.

“Didn’t I tell you so?” said Flask; “yes, you’ll soon see this right
whale’s head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti’s.”

In good time, Flask’s saying proved true. As before, the Pequod steeply
leaned over towards the sperm whale’s head, now, by the counterpoise of
both heads, she regained her even keel; though sorely strained, you may
well believe. So, when on one side you hoist in Locke’s head, you go
over that way; but now, on the other side, hoist in Kant’s and you come
back again; but in very poor plight. Thus, some minds for ever keep
trimming boat. Oh, ye foolish! throw all these thunder-heads overboard,
and then you will float light and right.

In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside the
ship, the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the
case of a sperm whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut
off whole, but in the former the lips and tongue are separately removed
and hoisted on deck, with all the well known black bone attached to
what is called the crown-piece. But nothing like this, in the present
case, had been done. The carcases of both whales had dropped astern;
and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a mule carrying a pair
of overburdening panniers.

Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale’s head, and ever
and anon glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own
hand. And Ahab chanced so to stand, that the Parsee occupied his
shadow; while, if the Parsee’s shadow was there at all it seemed only
to blend with, and lengthen Ahab’s. As the crew toiled on, Laplandish
speculations were bandied among them, concerning all these passing
things.


CHAPTER 74. The Sperm Whale’s Head—Contrasted View.

Here, now, are two great whales, laying their heads together; let us
join them, and lay together our own.

Of the grand order of folio leviathans, the Sperm Whale and the Right
Whale are by far the most noteworthy. They are the only whales
regularly hunted by man. To the Nantucketer, they present the two
extremes of all the known varieties of the whale. As the external
difference between them is mainly observable in their heads; and as a
head of each is this moment hanging from the Pequod’s side; and as we
may freely go from one to the other, by merely stepping across the
deck:—where, I should like to know, will you obtain a better chance to
study practical cetology than here?

In the first place, you are struck by the general contrast between
these heads. Both are massive enough in all conscience; but there is a
certain mathematical symmetry in the Sperm Whale’s which the Right
Whale’s sadly lacks. There is more character in the Sperm Whale’s head.
As you behold it, you involuntarily yield the immense superiority to
him, in point of pervading dignity. In the present instance, too, this
dignity is heightened by the pepper and salt colour of his head at the
summit, giving token of advanced age and large experience. In short, he
is what the fishermen technically call a “grey-headed whale.”

Let us now note what is least dissimilar in these heads—namely, the two
most important organs, the eye and the ear. Far back on the side of the
head, and low down, near the angle of either whale’s jaw, if you
narrowly search, you will at last see a lashless eye, which you would
fancy to be a young colt’s eye; so out of all proportion is it to the
magnitude of the head.

Now, from this peculiar sideway position of the whale’s eyes, it is
plain that he can never see an object which is exactly ahead, no more
than he can one exactly astern. In a word, the position of the whale’s
eyes corresponds to that of a man’s ears; and you may fancy, for
yourself, how it would fare with you, did you sideways survey objects
through your ears. You would find that you could only command some
thirty degrees of vision in advance of the straight side-line of sight;
and about thirty more behind it. If your bitterest foe were walking
straight towards you, with dagger uplifted in broad day, you would not
be able to see him, any more than if he were stealing upon you from
behind. In a word, you would have two backs, so to speak; but, at the
same time, also, two fronts (side fronts): for what is it that makes
the front of a man—what, indeed, but his eyes?

Moreover, while in most other animals that I can now think of, the eyes
are so planted as imperceptibly to blend their visual power, so as to
produce one picture and not two to the brain; the peculiar position of
the whale’s eyes, effectually divided as they are by many cubic feet of
solid head, which towers between them like a great mountain separating
two lakes in valleys; this, of course, must wholly separate the
impressions which each independent organ imparts. The whale, therefore,
must see one distinct picture on this side, and another distinct
picture on that side; while all between must be profound darkness and
nothingness to him. Man may, in effect, be said to look out on the
world from a sentry-box with two joined sashes for his window. But with
the whale, these two sashes are separately inserted, making two
distinct windows, but sadly impairing the view. This peculiarity of the
whale’s eyes is a thing always to be borne in mind in the fishery; and
to be remembered by the reader in some subsequent scenes.

A curious and most puzzling question might be started concerning this
visual matter as touching the Leviathan. But I must be content with a
hint. So long as a man’s eyes are open in the light, the act of seeing
is involuntary; that is, he cannot then help mechanically seeing
whatever objects are before him. Nevertheless, any one’s experience
will teach him, that though he can take in an undiscriminating sweep of
things at one glance, it is quite impossible for him, attentively, and
completely, to examine any two things—however large or however small—at
one and the same instant of time; never mind if they lie side by side
and touch each other. But if you now come to separate these two
objects, and surround each by a circle of profound darkness; then, in
order to see one of them, in such a manner as to bring your mind to
bear on it, the other will be utterly excluded from your contemporary
consciousness. How is it, then, with the whale? True, both his eyes, in
themselves, must simultaneously act; but is his brain so much more
comprehensive, combining, and subtle than man’s, that he can at the
same moment of time attentively examine two distinct prospects, one on
one side of him, and the other in an exactly opposite direction? If he
can, then is it as marvellous a thing in him, as if a man were able
simultaneously to go through the demonstrations of two distinct
problems in Euclid. Nor, strictly investigated, is there any
incongruity in this comparison.

It may be but an idle whim, but it has always seemed to me, that the
extraordinary vacillations of movement displayed by some whales when
beset by three or four boats; the timidity and liability to queer
frights, so common to such whales; I think that all this indirectly
proceeds from the helpless perplexity of volition, in which their
divided and diametrically opposite powers of vision must involve them.

But the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye. If you are an
entire stranger to their race, you might hunt over these two heads for
hours, and never discover that organ. The ear has no external leaf
whatever; and into the hole itself you can hardly insert a quill, so
wondrously minute is it. It is lodged a little behind the eye. With
respect to their ears, this important difference is to be observed
between the sperm whale and the right. While the ear of the former has
an external opening, that of the latter is entirely and evenly covered
over with a membrane, so as to be quite imperceptible from without.

Is it not curious, that so vast a being as the whale should see the
world through so small an eye, and hear the thunder through an ear
which is smaller than a hare’s? But if his eyes were broad as the lens
of Herschel’s great telescope; and his ears capacious as the porches of
cathedrals; would that make him any longer of sight, or sharper of
hearing? Not at all.—Why then do you try to “enlarge” your mind?
Subtilize it.

Let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand, cant
over the sperm whale’s head, that it may lie bottom up; then, ascending
by a ladder to the summit, have a peep down the mouth; and were it not
that the body is now completely separated from it, with a lantern we
might descend into the great Kentucky Mammoth Cave of his stomach. But
let us hold on here by this tooth, and look about us where we are. What
a really beautiful and chaste-looking mouth! from floor to ceiling,
lined, or rather papered with a glistening white membrane, glossy as
bridal satins.

But come out now, and look at this portentous lower jaw, which seems
like the long narrow lid of an immense snuff-box, with the hinge at one
end, instead of one side. If you pry it up, so as to get it overhead,
and expose its rows of teeth, it seems a terrific portcullis; and such,
alas! it proves to many a poor wight in the fishery, upon whom these
spikes fall with impaling force. But far more terrible is it to behold,
when fathoms down in the sea, you see some sulky whale, floating there
suspended, with his prodigious jaw, some fifteen feet long, hanging
straight down at right-angles with his body, for all the world like a
ship’s jib-boom. This whale is not dead; he is only dispirited; out of
sorts, perhaps; hypochondriac; and so supine, that the hinges of his
jaw have relaxed, leaving him there in that ungainly sort of plight, a
reproach to all his tribe, who must, no doubt, imprecate lock-jaws upon
him.

In most cases this lower jaw—being easily unhinged by a practised
artist—is disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose of extracting
the ivory teeth, and furnishing a supply of that hard white whalebone
with which the fishermen fashion all sorts of curious articles,
including canes, umbrella-stocks, and handles to riding-whips.

With a long, weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board, as if it were an
anchor; and when the proper time comes—some few days after the other
work—Queequeg, Daggoo, and Tashtego, being all accomplished dentists,
are set to drawing teeth. With a keen cutting-spade, Queequeg lances
the gums; then the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts, and a tackle being
rigged from aloft, they drag out these teeth, as Michigan oxen drag
stumps of old oaks out of wild wood lands. There are generally
forty-two teeth in all; in old whales, much worn down, but undecayed;
nor filled after our artificial fashion. The jaw is afterwards sawn
into slabs, and piled away like joists for building houses.


CHAPTER 75. The Right Whale’s Head—Contrasted View.

Crossing the deck, let us now have a good long look at the Right
Whale’s head.

As in general shape the noble Sperm Whale’s head may be compared to a
Roman war-chariot (especially in front, where it is so broadly
rounded); so, at a broad view, the Right Whale’s head bears a rather
inelegant resemblance to a gigantic galliot-toed shoe. Two hundred
years ago an old Dutch voyager likened its shape to that of a
shoemaker’s last. And in this same last or shoe, that old woman of the
nursery tale, with the swarming brood, might very comfortably be
lodged, she and all her progeny.

But as you come nearer to this great head it begins to assume different
aspects, according to your point of view. If you stand on its summit
and look at these two F-shaped spoutholes, you would take the whole
head for an enormous bass-viol, and these spiracles, the apertures in
its sounding-board. Then, again, if you fix your eye upon this strange,
crested, comb-like incrustation on the top of the mass—this green,
barnacled thing, which the Greenlanders call the “crown,” and the
Southern fishers the “bonnet” of the Right Whale; fixing your eyes
solely on this, you would take the head for the trunk of some huge oak,
with a bird’s nest in its crotch. At any rate, when you watch those
live crabs that nestle here on this bonnet, such an idea will be almost
sure to occur to you; unless, indeed, your fancy has been fixed by the
technical term “crown” also bestowed upon it; in which case you will
take great interest in thinking how this mighty monster is actually a
diademed king of the sea, whose green crown has been put together for
him in this marvellous manner. But if this whale be a king, he is a
very sulky looking fellow to grace a diadem. Look at that hanging lower
lip! what a huge sulk and pout is there! a sulk and pout, by
carpenter’s measurement, about twenty feet long and five feet deep; a
sulk and pout that will yield you some 500 gallons of oil and more.

A great pity, now, that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped.
The fissure is about a foot across. Probably the mother during an
important interval was sailing down the Peruvian coast, when
earthquakes caused the beach to gape. Over this lip, as over a slippery
threshold, we now slide into the mouth. Upon my word were I at
Mackinaw, I should take this to be the inside of an Indian wigwam. Good
Lord! is this the road that Jonah went? The roof is about twelve feet
high, and runs to a pretty sharp angle, as if there were a regular
ridge-pole there; while these ribbed, arched, hairy sides, present us
with those wondrous, half vertical, scimetar-shaped slats of whalebone,
say three hundred on a side, which depending from the upper part of the
head or crown bone, form those Venetian blinds which have elsewhere
been cursorily mentioned. The edges of these bones are fringed with
hairy fibres, through which the Right Whale strains the water, and in
whose intricacies he retains the small fish, when openmouthed he goes
through the seas of brit in feeding time. In the central blinds of
bone, as they stand in their natural order, there are certain curious
marks, curves, hollows, and ridges, whereby some whalemen calculate the
creature’s age, as the age of an oak by its circular rings. Though the
certainty of this criterion is far from demonstrable, yet it has the
savor of analogical probability. At any rate, if we yield to it, we
must grant a far greater age to the Right Whale than at first glance
will seem reasonable.

In old times, there seem to have prevailed the most curious fancies
concerning these blinds. One voyager in Purchas calls them the wondrous
“whiskers” inside of the whale’s mouth;* another, “hogs’ bristles”; a
third old gentleman in Hackluyt uses the following elegant language:
“There are about two hundred and fifty fins growing on each side of his
upper _chop_, which arch over his tongue on each side of his mouth.”

*This reminds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker, or
rather a moustache, consisting of a few scattered white hairs on the
upper part of the outer end of the lower jaw. Sometimes these tufts
impart a rather brigandish expression to his otherwise solemn
countenance.

As every one knows, these same “hogs’ bristles,” “fins,” “whiskers,”
“blinds,” or whatever you please, furnish to the ladies their busks and
other stiffening contrivances. But in this particular, the demand has
long been on the decline. It was in Queen Anne’s time that the bone was
in its glory, the farthingale being then all the fashion. And as those
ancient dames moved about gaily, though in the jaws of the whale, as
you may say; even so, in a shower, with the like thoughtlessness, do we
nowadays fly under the same jaws for protection; the umbrella being a
tent spread over the same bone.

But now forget all about blinds and whiskers for a moment, and,
standing in the Right Whale’s mouth, look around you afresh. Seeing all
these colonnades of bone so methodically ranged about, would you not
think you were inside of the great Haarlem organ, and gazing upon its
thousand pipes? For a carpet to the organ we have a rug of the softest
Turkey—the tongue, which is glued, as it were, to the floor of the
mouth. It is very fat and tender, and apt to tear in pieces in hoisting
it on deck. This particular tongue now before us; at a passing glance I
should say it was a six-barreler; that is, it will yield you about that
amount of oil.

Ere this, you must have plainly seen the truth of what I started
with—that the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale have almost entirely
different heads. To sum up, then: in the Right Whale’s there is no
great well of sperm; no ivory teeth at all; no long, slender mandible
of a lower jaw, like the Sperm Whale’s. Nor in the Sperm Whale are
there any of those blinds of bone; no huge lower lip; and scarcely
anything of a tongue. Again, the Right Whale has two external
spout-holes, the Sperm Whale only one.

Look your last, now, on these venerable hooded heads, while they yet
lie together; for one will soon sink, unrecorded, in the sea; the other
will not be very long in following.

Can you catch the expression of the Sperm Whale’s there? It is the same
he died with, only some of the longer wrinkles in the forehead seem now
faded away. I think his broad brow to be full of a prairie-like
placidity, born of a speculative indifference as to death. But mark the
other head’s expression. See that amazing lower lip, pressed by
accident against the vessel’s side, so as firmly to embrace the jaw.
Does not this whole head seem to speak of an enormous practical
resolution in facing death? This Right Whale I take to have been a
Stoic; the Sperm Whale, a Platonian, who might have taken up Spinoza in
his latter years.


CHAPTER 76. The Battering-Ram.

Ere quitting, for the nonce, the Sperm Whale’s head, I would have you,
as a sensible physiologist, simply—particularly remark its front
aspect, in all its compacted collectedness. I would have you
investigate it now with the sole view of forming to yourself some
unexaggerated, intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram power may
be lodged there. Here is a vital point; for you must either
satisfactorily settle this matter with yourself, or for ever remain an
infidel as to one of the most appalling, but not the less true events,
perhaps anywhere to be found in all recorded history.

You observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the Sperm Whale,
the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical plane to the
water; you observe that the lower part of that front slopes
considerably backwards, so as to furnish more of a retreat for the long
socket which receives the boom-like lower jaw; you observe that the
mouth is entirely under the head, much in the same way, indeed, as
though your own mouth were entirely under your chin. Moreover you
observe that the whale has no external nose; and that what nose he
has—his spout hole—is on the top of his head; you observe that his eyes
and ears are at the sides of his head, nearly one third of his entire
length from the front. Wherefore, you must now have perceived that the
front of the Sperm Whale’s head is a dead, blind wall, without a single
organ or tender prominence of any sort whatsoever. Furthermore, you are
now to consider that only in the extreme, lower, backward sloping part
of the front of the head, is there the slightest vestige of bone; and
not till you get near twenty feet from the forehead do you come to the
full cranial development. So that this whole enormous boneless mass is
as one wad. Finally, though, as will soon be revealed, its contents
partly comprise the most delicate oil; yet, you are now to be apprised
of the nature of the substance which so impregnably invests all that
apparent effeminacy. In some previous place I have described to you how
the blubber wraps the body of the whale, as the rind wraps an orange.
Just so with the head; but with this difference: about the head this
envelope, though not so thick, is of a boneless toughness, inestimable
by any man who has not handled it. The severest pointed harpoon, the
sharpest lance darted by the strongest human arm, impotently rebounds
from it. It is as though the forehead of the Sperm Whale were paved
with horses’ hoofs. I do not think that any sensation lurks in it.

Bethink yourself also of another thing. When two large, loaded Indiamen
chance to crowd and crush towards each other in the docks, what do the
sailors do? They do not suspend between them, at the point of coming
contact, any merely hard substance, like iron or wood. No, they hold
there a large, round wad of tow and cork, enveloped in the thickest and
toughest of ox-hide. That bravely and uninjured takes the jam which
would have snapped all their oaken handspikes and iron crow-bars. By
itself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact I drive at. But
supplementary to this, it has hypothetically occurred to me, that as
ordinary fish possess what is called a swimming bladder in them,
capable, at will, of distension or contraction; and as the Sperm Whale,
as far as I know, has no such provision in him; considering, too, the
otherwise inexplicable manner in which he now depresses his head
altogether beneath the surface, and anon swims with it high elevated
out of the water; considering the unobstructed elasticity of its
envelope; considering the unique interior of his head; it has
hypothetically occurred to me, I say, that those mystical lung-celled
honeycombs there may possibly have some hitherto unknown and
unsuspected connexion with the outer air, so as to be susceptible to
atmospheric distension and contraction. If this be so, fancy the
irresistibleness of that might, to which the most impalpable and
destructive of all elements contributes.

Now, mark. Unerringly impelling this dead, impregnable, uninjurable
wall, and this most buoyant thing within; there swims behind it all a
mass of tremendous life, only to be adequately estimated as piled wood
is—by the cord; and all obedient to one volition, as the smallest
insect. So that when I shall hereafter detail to you all the
specialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in this
expansive monster; when I shall show you some of his more
inconsiderable braining feats; I trust you will have renounced all
ignorant incredulity, and be ready to abide by this; that though the
Sperm Whale stove a passage through the Isthmus of Darien, and mixed
the Atlantic with the Pacific, you would not elevate one hair of your
eye-brow. For unless you own the whale, you are but a provincial and
sentimentalist in Truth. But clear Truth is a thing for salamander
giants only to encounter; how small the chances for the provincials
then? What befell the weakling youth lifting the dread goddess’s veil
at Lais?


CHAPTER 77. The Great Heidelburgh Tun.

Now comes the Baling of the Case. But to comprehend it aright, you must
know something of the curious internal structure of the thing operated
upon.

Regarding the Sperm Whale’s head as a solid oblong, you may, on an
inclined plane, sideways divide it into two quoins,* whereof the lower
is the bony structure, forming the cranium and jaws, and the upper an
unctuous mass wholly free from bones; its broad forward end forming the
expanded vertical apparent forehead of the whale. At the middle of the
forehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin, and then you have two
almost equal parts, which before were naturally divided by an internal
wall of a thick tendinous substance.

*Quoin is not a Euclidean term. It belongs to the pure nautical
mathematics. I know not that it has been defined before. A quoin is a
solid which differs from a wedge in having its sharp end formed by the
steep inclination of one side, instead of the mutual tapering of both
sides.

The lower subdivided part, called the junk, is one immense honeycomb of
oil, formed by the crossing and recrossing, into ten thousand
infiltrated cells, of tough elastic white fibres throughout its whole
extent. The upper part, known as the Case, may be regarded as the great
Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale. And as that famous great tierce is
mystically carved in front, so the whale’s vast plaited forehead forms
innumerable strange devices for the emblematical adornment of his
wondrous tun. Moreover, as that of Heidelburgh was always replenished
with the most excellent of the wines of the Rhenish valleys, so the tun
of the whale contains by far the most precious of all his oily
vintages; namely, the highly-prized spermaceti, in its absolutely pure,
limpid, and odoriferous state. Nor is this precious substance found
unalloyed in any other part of the creature. Though in life it remains
perfectly fluid, yet, upon exposure to the air, after death, it soon
begins to concrete; sending forth beautiful crystalline shoots, as when
the first thin delicate ice is just forming in water. A large whale’s
case generally yields about five hundred gallons of sperm, though from
unavoidable circumstances, considerable of it is spilled, leaks, and
dribbles away, or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the ticklish
business of securing what you can.

I know not with what fine and costly material the Heidelburgh Tun was
coated within, but in superlative richness that coating could not
possibly have compared with the silken pearl-coloured membrane, like
the lining of a fine pelisse, forming the inner surface of the Sperm
Whale’s case.

It will have been seen that the Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale
embraces the entire length of the entire top of the head; and since—as
has been elsewhere set forth—the head embraces one third of the whole
length of the creature, then setting that length down at eighty feet
for a good sized whale, you have more than twenty-six feet for the
depth of the tun, when it is lengthwise hoisted up and down against a
ship’s side.

As in decapitating the whale, the operator’s instrument is brought
close to the spot where an entrance is subsequently forced into the
spermaceti magazine; he has, therefore, to be uncommonly heedful, lest
a careless, untimely stroke should invade the sanctuary and wastingly
let out its invaluable contents. It is this decapitated end of the
head, also, which is at last elevated out of the water, and retained in
that position by the enormous cutting tackles, whose hempen
combinations, on one side, make quite a wilderness of ropes in that
quarter.

Thus much being said, attend now, I pray you, to that marvellous and—in
this particular instance—almost fatal operation whereby the Sperm
Whale’s great Heidelburgh Tun is tapped.


CHAPTER 78. Cistern and Buckets.

Nimble as a cat, Tashtego mounts aloft; and without altering his erect
posture, runs straight out upon the overhanging mainyard-arm, to the
part where it exactly projects over the hoisted Tun. He has carried
with him a light tackle called a whip, consisting of only two parts,
travelling through a single-sheaved block. Securing this block, so that
it hangs down from the yard-arm, he swings one end of the rope, till it
is caught and firmly held by a hand on deck. Then, hand-over-hand, down
the other part, the Indian drops through the air, till dexterously he
lands on the summit of the head. There—still high elevated above the
rest of the company, to whom he vivaciously cries—he seems some Turkish
Muezzin calling the good people to prayers from the top of a tower. A
short-handled sharp spade being sent up to him, he diligently searches
for the proper place to begin breaking into the Tun. In this business
he proceeds very heedfully, like a treasure-hunter in some old house,
sounding the walls to find where the gold is masoned in. By the time
this cautious search is over, a stout iron-bound bucket, precisely like
a well-bucket, has been attached to one end of the whip; while the
other end, being stretched across the deck, is there held by two or
three alert hands. These last now hoist the bucket within grasp of the
Indian, to whom another person has reached up a very long pole.
Inserting this pole into the bucket, Tashtego downward guides the
bucket into the Tun, till it entirely disappears; then giving the word
to the seamen at the whip, up comes the bucket again, all bubbling like
a dairy-maid’s pail of new milk. Carefully lowered from its height, the
full-freighted vessel is caught by an appointed hand, and quickly
emptied into a large tub. Then remounting aloft, it again goes through
the same round until the deep cistern will yield no more. Towards the
end, Tashtego has to ram his long pole harder and harder, and deeper
and deeper into the Tun, until some twenty feet of the pole have gone
down.

Now, the people of the Pequod had been baling some time in this way;
several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm; when all at once
a queer accident happened. Whether it was that Tashtego, that wild
Indian, was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a moment his
one-handed hold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head; or
whether the place where he stood was so treacherous and oozy; or
whether the Evil One himself would have it to fall out so, without
stating his particular reasons; how it was exactly, there is no telling
now; but, on a sudden, as the eightieth or ninetieth bucket came
suckingly up—my God! poor Tashtego—like the twin reciprocating bucket
in a veritable well, dropped head-foremost down into this great Tun of
Heidelburgh, and with a horrible oily gurgling, went clean out of
sight!

“Man overboard!” cried Daggoo, who amid the general consternation first
came to his senses. “Swing the bucket this way!” and putting one foot
into it, so as the better to secure his slippery hand-hold on the whip
itself, the hoisters ran him high up to the top of the head, almost
before Tashtego could have reached its interior bottom. Meantime, there
was a terrible tumult. Looking over the side, they saw the before
lifeless head throbbing and heaving just below the surface of the sea,
as if that moment seized with some momentous idea; whereas it was only
the poor Indian unconsciously revealing by those struggles the perilous
depth to which he had sunk.

At this instant, while Daggoo, on the summit of the head, was clearing
the whip—which had somehow got foul of the great cutting tackles—a
sharp cracking noise was heard; and to the unspeakable horror of all,
one of the two enormous hooks suspending the head tore out, and with a
vast vibration the enormous mass sideways swung, till the drunk ship
reeled and shook as if smitten by an iceberg. The one remaining hook,
upon which the entire strain now depended, seemed every instant to be
on the point of giving way; an event still more likely from the violent
motions of the head.

“Come down, come down!” yelled the seamen to Daggoo, but with one hand
holding on to the heavy tackles, so that if the head should drop, he
would still remain suspended; the negro having cleared the foul line,
rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well, meaning that the
buried harpooneer should grasp it, and so be hoisted out.

“In heaven’s name, man,” cried Stubb, “are you ramming home a cartridge
there?—Avast! How will that help him; jamming that iron-bound bucket on
top of his head? Avast, will ye!”

“Stand clear of the tackle!” cried a voice like the bursting of a
rocket.

Almost in the same instant, with a thunder-boom, the enormous mass
dropped into the sea, like Niagara’s Table-Rock into the whirlpool; the
suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it, to far down her glittering
copper; and all caught their breath, as half swinging—now over the
sailors’ heads, and now over the water—Daggoo, through a thick mist of
spray, was dimly beheld clinging to the pendulous tackles, while poor,
buried-alive Tashtego was sinking utterly down to the bottom of the
sea! But hardly had the blinding vapor cleared away, when a naked
figure with a boarding-sword in his hand, was for one swift moment seen
hovering over the bulwarks. The next, a loud splash announced that my
brave Queequeg had dived to the rescue. One packed rush was made to the
side, and every eye counted every ripple, as moment followed moment,
and no sign of either the sinker or the diver could be seen. Some hands
now jumped into a boat alongside, and pushed a little off from the
ship.

“Ha! ha!” cried Daggoo, all at once, from his now quiet, swinging perch
overhead; and looking further off from the side, we saw an arm thrust
upright from the blue waves; a sight strange to see, as an arm thrust
forth from the grass over a grave.

“Both! both!—it is both!”—cried Daggoo again with a joyful shout; and
soon after, Queequeg was seen boldly striking out with one hand, and
with the other clutching the long hair of the Indian. Drawn into the
waiting boat, they were quickly brought to the deck; but Tashtego was
long in coming to, and Queequeg did not look very brisk.

Now, how had this noble rescue been accomplished? Why, diving after the
slowly descending head, Queequeg with his keen sword had made side
lunges near its bottom, so as to scuttle a large hole there; then
dropping his sword, had thrust his long arm far inwards and upwards,
and so hauled out poor Tash by the head. He averred, that upon first
thrusting in for him, a leg was presented; but well knowing that that
was not as it ought to be, and might occasion great trouble;—he had
thrust back the leg, and by a dexterous heave and toss, had wrought a
somerset upon the Indian; so that with the next trial, he came forth in
the good old way—head foremost. As for the great head itself, that was
doing as well as could be expected.

And thus, through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of
Queequeg, the deliverance, or rather, delivery of Tashtego, was
successfully accomplished, in the teeth, too, of the most untoward and
apparently hopeless impediments; which is a lesson by no means to be
forgotten. Midwifery should be taught in the same course with fencing
and boxing, riding and rowing.

I know that this queer adventure of the Gay-Header’s will be sure to
seem incredible to some landsmen, though they themselves may have
either seen or heard of some one’s falling into a cistern ashore; an
accident which not seldom happens, and with much less reason too than
the Indian’s, considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb of the
Sperm Whale’s well.

But, peradventure, it may be sagaciously urged, how is this? We thought
the tissued, infiltrated head of the Sperm Whale, was the lightest and
most corky part about him; and yet thou makest it sink in an element of
a far greater specific gravity than itself. We have thee there. Not at
all, but I have ye; for at the time poor Tash fell in, the case had
been nearly emptied of its lighter contents, leaving little but the
dense tendinous wall of the well—a double welded, hammered substance,
as I have before said, much heavier than the sea water, and a lump of
which sinks in it like lead almost. But the tendency to rapid sinking
in this substance was in the present instance materially counteracted
by the other parts of the head remaining undetached from it, so that it
sank very slowly and deliberately indeed, affording Queequeg a fair
chance for performing his agile obstetrics on the run, as you may say.
Yes, it was a running delivery, so it was.

Now, had Tashtego perished in that head, it had been a very precious
perishing; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest of fragrant
spermaceti; coffined, hearsed, and tombed in the secret inner chamber
and sanctum sanctorum of the whale. Only one sweeter end can readily be
recalled—the delicious death of an Ohio honey-hunter, who seeking honey
in the crotch of a hollow tree, found such exceeding store of it, that
leaning too far over, it sucked him in, so that he died embalmed. How
many, think ye, have likewise fallen into Plato’s honey head, and
sweetly perished there?


CHAPTER 79. The Prairie.

To scan the lines of his face, or feel the bumps on the head of this
Leviathan; this is a thing which no Physiognomist or Phrenologist has
as yet undertaken. Such an enterprise would seem almost as hopeful as
for Lavater to have scrutinized the wrinkles on the Rock of Gibraltar,
or for Gall to have mounted a ladder and manipulated the Dome of the
Pantheon. Still, in that famous work of his, Lavater not only treats of
the various faces of men, but also attentively studies the faces of
horses, birds, serpents, and fish; and dwells in detail upon the
modifications of expression discernible therein. Nor have Gall and his
disciple Spurzheim failed to throw out some hints touching the
phrenological characteristics of other beings than man. Therefore,
though I am but ill qualified for a pioneer, in the application of
these two semi-sciences to the whale, I will do my endeavor. I try all
things; I achieve what I can.

Physiognomically regarded, the Sperm Whale is an anomalous creature. He
has no proper nose. And since the nose is the central and most
conspicuous of the features; and since it perhaps most modifies and
finally controls their combined expression; hence it would seem that
its entire absence, as an external appendage, must very largely affect
the countenance of the whale. For as in landscape gardening, a spire,
cupola, monument, or tower of some sort, is deemed almost indispensable
to the completion of the scene; so no face can be physiognomically in
keeping without the elevated open-work belfry of the nose. Dash the
nose from Phidias’s marble Jove, and what a sorry remainder!
Nevertheless, Leviathan is of so mighty a magnitude, all his
proportions are so stately, that the same deficiency which in the
sculptured Jove were hideous, in him is no blemish at all. Nay, it is
an added grandeur. A nose to the whale would have been impertinent. As
on your physiognomical voyage you sail round his vast head in your
jolly-boat, your noble conceptions of him are never insulted by the
reflection that he has a nose to be pulled. A pestilent conceit, which
so often will insist upon obtruding even when beholding the mightiest
royal beadle on his throne.

In some particulars, perhaps the most imposing physiognomical view to
be had of the Sperm Whale, is that of the full front of his head. This
aspect is sublime.

In thought, a fine human brow is like the East when troubled with the
morning. In the repose of the pasture, the curled brow of the bull has
a touch of the grand in it. Pushing heavy cannon up mountain defiles,
the elephant’s brow is majestic. Human or animal, the mystical brow is
as that great golden seal affixed by the German emperors to their
decrees. It signifies—“God: done this day by my hand.” But in most
creatures, nay in man himself, very often the brow is but a mere strip
of alpine land lying along the snow line. Few are the foreheads which
like Shakespeare’s or Melancthon’s rise so high, and descend so low,
that the eyes themselves seem clear, eternal, tideless mountain lakes;
and all above them in the forehead’s wrinkles, you seem to track the
antlered thoughts descending there to drink, as the Highland hunters
track the snow prints of the deer. But in the great Sperm Whale, this
high and mighty god-like dignity inherent in the brow is so immensely
amplified, that gazing on it, in that full front view, you feel the
Deity and the dread powers more forcibly than in beholding any other
object in living nature. For you see no one point precisely; not one
distinct feature is revealed; no nose, eyes, ears, or mouth; no face;
he has none, proper; nothing but that one broad firmament of a
forehead, pleated with riddles; dumbly lowering with the doom of boats,
and ships, and men. Nor, in profile, does this wondrous brow diminish;
though that way viewed its grandeur does not domineer upon you so. In
profile, you plainly perceive that horizontal, semi-crescentic
depression in the forehead’s middle, which, in man, is Lavater’s mark
of genius.

But how? Genius in the Sperm Whale? Has the Sperm Whale ever written a
book, spoken a speech? No, his great genius is declared in his doing
nothing particular to prove it. It is moreover declared in his
pyramidical silence. And this reminds me that had the great Sperm Whale
been known to the young Orient World, he would have been deified by
their child-magian thoughts. They deified the crocodile of the Nile,
because the crocodile is tongueless; and the Sperm Whale has no tongue,
or at least it is so exceedingly small, as to be incapable of
protrusion. If hereafter any highly cultured, poetical nation shall
lure back to their birth-right, the merry May-day gods of old; and
livingly enthrone them again in the now egotistical sky; in the now
unhaunted hill; then be sure, exalted to Jove’s high seat, the great
Sperm Whale shall lord it.

Champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics. But there is
no Champollion to decipher the Egypt of every man’s and every being’s
face. Physiognomy, like every other human science, is but a passing
fable. If then, Sir William Jones, who read in thirty languages, could
not read the simplest peasant’s face in its profounder and more subtle
meanings, how may unlettered Ishmael hope to read the awful Chaldee of
the Sperm Whale’s brow? I but put that brow before you. Read it if you
can.


CHAPTER 80. The Nut.

If the Sperm Whale be physiognomically a Sphinx, to the phrenologist
his brain seems that geometrical circle which it is impossible to
square.

In the full-grown creature the skull will measure at least twenty feet
in length. Unhinge the lower jaw, and the side view of this skull is as
the side of a moderately inclined plane resting throughout on a level
base. But in life—as we have elsewhere seen—this inclined plane is
angularly filled up, and almost squared by the enormous superincumbent
mass of the junk and sperm. At the high end the skull forms a crater to
bed that part of the mass; while under the long floor of this crater—in
another cavity seldom exceeding ten inches in length and as many in
depth—reposes the mere handful of this monster’s brain. The brain is at
least twenty feet from his apparent forehead in life; it is hidden away
behind its vast outworks, like the innermost citadel within the
amplified fortifications of Quebec. So like a choice casket is it
secreted in him, that I have known some whalemen who peremptorily deny
that the Sperm Whale has any other brain than that palpable semblance
of one formed by the cubic-yards of his sperm magazine. Lying in
strange folds, courses, and convolutions, to their apprehensions, it
seems more in keeping with the idea of his general might to regard that
mystic part of him as the seat of his intelligence.

It is plain, then, that phrenologically the head of this Leviathan, in
the creature’s living intact state, is an entire delusion. As for his
true brain, you can then see no indications of it, nor feel any. The
whale, like all things that are mighty, wears a false brow to the
common world.

If you unload his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear view
of its rear end, which is the high end, you will be struck by its
resemblance to the human skull, beheld in the same situation, and from
the same point of view. Indeed, place this reversed skull (scaled down
to the human magnitude) among a plate of men’s skulls, and you would
involuntarily confound it with them; and remarking the depressions on
one part of its summit, in phrenological phrase you would say—This man
had no self-esteem, and no veneration. And by those negations,
considered along with the affirmative fact of his prodigious bulk and
power, you can best form to yourself the truest, though not the most
exhilarating conception of what the most exalted potency is.

But if from the comparative dimensions of the whale’s proper brain, you
deem it incapable of being adequately charted, then I have another idea
for you. If you attentively regard almost any quadruped’s spine, you
will be struck with the resemblance of its vertebræ to a strung
necklace of dwarfed skulls, all bearing rudimental resemblance to the
skull proper. It is a German conceit, that the vertebræ are absolutely
undeveloped skulls. But the curious external resemblance, I take it the
Germans were not the first men to perceive. A foreign friend once
pointed it out to me, in the skeleton of a foe he had slain, and with
the vertebræ of which he was inlaying, in a sort of basso-relievo, the
beaked prow of his canoe. Now, I consider that the phrenologists have
omitted an important thing in not pushing their investigations from the
cerebellum through the spinal canal. For I believe that much of a man’s
character will be found betokened in his backbone. I would rather feel
your spine than your skull, whoever you are. A thin joist of a spine
never yet upheld a full and noble soul. I rejoice in my spine, as in
the firm audacious staff of that flag which I fling half out to the
world.

Apply this spinal branch of phrenology to the Sperm Whale. His cranial
cavity is continuous with the first neck-vertebra; and in that vertebra
the bottom of the spinal canal will measure ten inches across, being
eight in height, and of a triangular figure with the base downwards. As
it passes through the remaining vertebræ the canal tapers in size, but
for a considerable distance remains of large capacity. Now, of course,
this canal is filled with much the same strangely fibrous substance—the
spinal cord—as the brain; and directly communicates with the brain. And
what is still more, for many feet after emerging from the brain’s
cavity, the spinal cord remains of an undecreasing girth, almost equal
to that of the brain. Under all these circumstances, would it be
unreasonable to survey and map out the whale’s spine phrenologically?
For, viewed in this light, the wonderful comparative smallness of his
brain proper is more than compensated by the wonderful comparative
magnitude of his spinal cord.

But leaving this hint to operate as it may with the phrenologists, I
would merely assume the spinal theory for a moment, in reference to the
Sperm Whale’s hump. This august hump, if I mistake not, rises over one
of the larger vertebræ, and is, therefore, in some sort, the outer
convex mould of it. From its relative situation then, I should call
this high hump the organ of firmness or indomitableness in the Sperm
Whale. And that the great monster is indomitable, you will yet have
reason to know.


CHAPTER 81. The Pequod Meets The Virgin.

The predestinated day arrived, and we duly met the ship Jungfrau,
Derick De Deer, master, of Bremen.

At one time the greatest whaling people in the world, the Dutch and
Germans are now among the least; but here and there at very wide
intervals of latitude and longitude, you still occasionally meet with
their flag in the Pacific.

For some reason, the Jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her respects.
While yet some distance from the Pequod, she rounded to, and dropping a
boat, her captain was impelled towards us, impatiently standing in the
bows instead of the stern.

“What has he in his hand there?” cried Starbuck, pointing to something
wavingly held by the German. “Impossible!—a lamp-feeder!”

“Not that,” said Stubb, “no, no, it’s a coffee-pot, Mr. Starbuck; he’s
coming off to make us our coffee, is the Yarman; don’t you see that big
tin can there alongside of him?—that’s his boiling water. Oh! he’s all
right, is the Yarman.”

“Go along with you,” cried Flask, “it’s a lamp-feeder and an oil-can.
He’s out of oil, and has come a-begging.”

However curious it may seem for an oil-ship to be borrowing oil on the
whale-ground, and however much it may invertedly contradict the old
proverb about carrying coals to Newcastle, yet sometimes such a thing
really happens; and in the present case Captain Derick De Deer did
indubitably conduct a lamp-feeder as Flask did declare.

As he mounted the deck, Ahab abruptly accosted him, without at all
heeding what he had in his hand; but in his broken lingo, the German
soon evinced his complete ignorance of the White Whale; immediately
turning the conversation to his lamp-feeder and oil can, with some
remarks touching his having to turn into his hammock at night in
profound darkness—his last drop of Bremen oil being gone, and not a
single flying-fish yet captured to supply the deficiency; concluding by
hinting that his ship was indeed what in the Fishery is technically
called a _clean_ one (that is, an empty one), well deserving the name
of Jungfrau or the Virgin.

His necessities supplied, Derick departed; but he had not gained his
ship’s side, when whales were almost simultaneously raised from the
mast-heads of both vessels; and so eager for the chase was Derick, that
without pausing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard, he slewed
round his boat and made after the leviathan lamp-feeders.

Now, the game having risen to leeward, he and the other three German
boats that soon followed him, had considerably the start of the
Pequod’s keels. There were eight whales, an average pod. Aware of their
danger, they were going all abreast with great speed straight before
the wind, rubbing their flanks as closely as so many spans of horses in
harness. They left a great, wide wake, as though continually unrolling
a great wide parchment upon the sea.

Full in this rapid wake, and many fathoms in the rear, swam a huge,
humped old bull, which by his comparatively slow progress, as well as
by the unusual yellowish incrustations overgrowing him, seemed
afflicted with the jaundice, or some other infirmity. Whether this
whale belonged to the pod in advance, seemed questionable; for it is
not customary for such venerable leviathans to be at all social.
Nevertheless, he stuck to their wake, though indeed their back water
must have retarded him, because the white-bone or swell at his broad
muzzle was a dashed one, like the swell formed when two hostile
currents meet. His spout was short, slow, and laborious; coming forth
with a choking sort of gush, and spending itself in torn shreds,
followed by strange subterranean commotions in him, which seemed to
have egress at his other buried extremity, causing the waters behind
him to upbubble.

“Who’s got some paregoric?” said Stubb, “he has the stomach-ache, I’m
afraid. Lord, think of having half an acre of stomach-ache! Adverse
winds are holding mad Christmas in him, boys. It’s the first foul wind
I ever knew to blow from astern; but look, did ever whale yaw so
before? it must be, he’s lost his tiller.”

As an overladen Indiaman bearing down the Hindostan coast with a deck
load of frightened horses, careens, buries, rolls, and wallows on her
way; so did this old whale heave his aged bulk, and now and then partly
turning over on his cumbrous rib-ends, expose the cause of his devious
wake in the unnatural stump of his starboard fin. Whether he had lost
that fin in battle, or had been born without it, it were hard to say.

“Only wait a bit, old chap, and I’ll give ye a sling for that wounded
arm,” cried cruel Flask, pointing to the whale-line near him.

“Mind he don’t sling thee with it,” cried Starbuck. “Give way, or the
German will have him.”

With one intent all the combined rival boats were pointed for this one
fish, because not only was he the largest, and therefore the most
valuable whale, but he was nearest to them, and the other whales were
going with such great velocity, moreover, as almost to defy pursuit for
the time. At this juncture the Pequod’s keels had shot by the three
German boats last lowered; but from the great start he had had,
Derick’s boat still led the chase, though every moment neared by his
foreign rivals. The only thing they feared, was, that from being
already so nigh to his mark, he would be enabled to dart his iron
before they could completely overtake and pass him. As for Derick, he
seemed quite confident that this would be the case, and occasionally
with a deriding gesture shook his lamp-feeder at the other boats.

“The ungracious and ungrateful dog!” cried Starbuck; “he mocks and
dares me with the very poor-box I filled for him not five minutes
ago!”—then in his old intense whisper—“Give way, greyhounds! Dog to
it!”

“I tell ye what it is, men”—cried Stubb to his crew—“it’s against my
religion to get mad; but I’d like to eat that villainous
Yarman—Pull—won’t ye? Are ye going to let that rascal beat ye? Do ye
love brandy? A hogshead of brandy, then, to the best man. Come, why
don’t some of ye burst a blood-vessel? Who’s that been dropping an
anchor overboard—we don’t budge an inch—we’re becalmed. Halloo, here’s
grass growing in the boat’s bottom—and by the Lord, the mast there’s
budding. This won’t do, boys. Look at that Yarman! The short and long
of it is, men, will ye spit fire or not?”

“Oh! see the suds he makes!” cried Flask, dancing up and down—“What a
hump—Oh, _do_ pile on the beef—lays like a log! Oh! my lads, _do_
spring—slap-jacks and quahogs for supper, you know, my lads—baked clams
and muffins—oh, _do_, _do_, spring,—he’s a hundred barreller—don’t lose
him now—don’t oh, _don’t!_—see that Yarman—Oh, won’t ye pull for your
duff, my lads—such a sog! such a sogger! Don’t ye love sperm? There
goes three thousand dollars, men!—a bank!—a whole bank! The bank of
England!—Oh, _do_, _do_, _do!_—What’s that Yarman about now?”

At this moment Derick was in the act of pitching his lamp-feeder at the
advancing boats, and also his oil-can; perhaps with the double view of
retarding his rivals’ way, and at the same time economically
accelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the backward toss.

“The unmannerly Dutch dogger!” cried Stubb. “Pull now, men, like fifty
thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils. What d’ye say,
Tashtego; are you the man to snap your spine in two-and-twenty pieces
for the honor of old Gayhead? What d’ye say?”

“I say, pull like god-dam,”—cried the Indian.

Fiercely, but evenly incited by the taunts of the German, the Pequod’s
three boats now began ranging almost abreast; and, so disposed,
momentarily neared him. In that fine, loose, chivalrous attitude of the
headsman when drawing near to his prey, the three mates stood up
proudly, occasionally backing the after oarsman with an exhilarating
cry of, “There she slides, now! Hurrah for the white-ash breeze! Down
with the Yarman! Sail over him!”

But so decided an original start had Derick had, that spite of all
their gallantry, he would have proved the victor in this race, had not
a righteous judgment descended upon him in a crab which caught the
blade of his midship oarsman. While this clumsy lubber was striving to
free his white-ash, and while, in consequence, Derick’s boat was nigh
to capsizing, and he thundering away at his men in a mighty rage;—that
was a good time for Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask. With a shout, they took
a mortal start forwards, and slantingly ranged up on the German’s
quarter. An instant more, and all four boats were diagonically in the
whale’s immediate wake, while stretching from them, on both sides, was
the foaming swell that he made.

It was a terrific, most pitiable, and maddening sight. The whale was
now going head out, and sending his spout before him in a continual
tormented jet; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony of
fright. Now to this hand, now to that, he yawed in his faltering
flight, and still at every billow that he broke, he spasmodically sank
in the sea, or sideways rolled towards the sky his one beating fin. So
have I seen a bird with clipped wing making affrighted broken circles
in the air, vainly striving to escape the piratical hawks. But the bird
has a voice, and with plaintive cries will make known her fear; but the
fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea, was chained up and enchanted
in him; he had no voice, save that choking respiration through his
spiracle, and this made the sight of him unspeakably pitiable; while
still, in his amazing bulk, portcullis jaw, and omnipotent tail, there
was enough to appal the stoutest man who so pitied.

Seeing now that but a very few moments more would give the Pequod’s
boats the advantage, and rather than be thus foiled of his game, Derick
chose to hazard what to him must have seemed a most unusually long
dart, ere the last chance would for ever escape.

But no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke, than all
three tigers—Queequeg, Tashtego, Daggoo—instinctively sprang to their
feet, and standing in a diagonal row, simultaneously pointed their
barbs; and darted over the head of the German harpooneer, their three
Nantucket irons entered the whale. Blinding vapors of foam and
white-fire! The three boats, in the first fury of the whale’s headlong
rush, bumped the German’s aside with such force, that both Derick and
his baffled harpooneer were spilled out, and sailed over by the three
flying keels.

“Don’t be afraid, my butter-boxes,” cried Stubb, casting a passing
glance upon them as he shot by; “ye’ll be picked up presently—all
right—I saw some sharks astern—St. Bernard’s dogs, you know—relieve
distressed travellers. Hurrah! this is the way to sail now. Every keel
a sunbeam! Hurrah!—Here we go like three tin kettles at the tail of a
mad cougar! This puts me in mind of fastening to an elephant in a
tilbury on a plain—makes the wheel-spokes fly, boys, when you fasten to
him that way; and there’s danger of being pitched out too, when you
strike a hill. Hurrah! this is the way a fellow feels when he’s going
to Davy Jones—all a rush down an endless inclined plane! Hurrah! this
whale carries the everlasting mail!”

But the monster’s run was a brief one. Giving a sudden gasp, he
tumultuously sounded. With a grating rush, the three lines flew round
the loggerheads with such a force as to gouge deep grooves in them;
while so fearful were the harpooneers that this rapid sounding would
soon exhaust the lines, that using all their dexterous might, they
caught repeated smoking turns with the rope to hold on; till at
last—owing to the perpendicular strain from the lead-lined chocks of
the boats, whence the three ropes went straight down into the blue—the
gunwales of the bows were almost even with the water, while the three
sterns tilted high in the air. And the whale soon ceasing to sound, for
some time they remained in that attitude, fearful of expending more
line, though the position was a little ticklish. But though boats have
been taken down and lost in this way, yet it is this “holding on,” as
it is called; this hooking up by the sharp barbs of his live flesh from
the back; this it is that often torments the Leviathan into soon rising
again to meet the sharp lance of his foes. Yet not to speak of the
peril of the thing, it is to be doubted whether this course is always
the best; for it is but reasonable to presume, that the longer the
stricken whale stays under water, the more he is exhausted. Because,
owing to the enormous surface of him—in a full grown sperm whale
something less than 2000 square feet—the pressure of the water is
immense. We all know what an astonishing atmospheric weight we
ourselves stand up under; even here, above-ground, in the air; how
vast, then, the burden of a whale, bearing on his back a column of two
hundred fathoms of ocean! It must at least equal the weight of fifty
atmospheres. One whaleman has estimated it at the weight of twenty
line-of-battle ships, with all their guns, and stores, and men on
board.

As the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea, gazing down
into its eternal blue noon; and as not a single groan or cry of any
sort, nay, not so much as a ripple or a bubble came up from its depths;
what landsman would have thought, that beneath all that silence and
placidity, the utmost monster of the seas was writhing and wrenching in
agony! Not eight inches of perpendicular rope were visible at the bows.
Seems it credible that by three such thin threads the great Leviathan
was suspended like the big weight to an eight day clock. Suspended? and
to what? To three bits of board. Is this the creature of whom it was
once so triumphantly said—“Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons?
or his head with fish-spears? The sword of him that layeth at him
cannot hold, the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon: he esteemeth iron
as straw; the arrow cannot make him flee; darts are counted as stubble;
he laugheth at the shaking of a spear!” This the creature? this he? Oh!
that unfulfilments should follow the prophets. For with the strength of
a thousand thighs in his tail, Leviathan had run his head under the
mountains of the sea, to hide him from the Pequod’s fish-spears!

In that sloping afternoon sunlight, the shadows that the three boats
sent down beneath the surface, must have been long enough and broad
enough to shade half Xerxes’ army. Who can tell how appalling to the
wounded whale must have been such huge phantoms flitting over his head!

“Stand by, men; he stirs,” cried Starbuck, as the three lines suddenly
vibrated in the water, distinctly conducting upwards to them, as by
magnetic wires, the life and death throbs of the whale, so that every
oarsman felt them in his seat. The next moment, relieved in great part
from the downward strain at the bows, the boats gave a sudden bounce
upwards, as a small icefield will, when a dense herd of white bears are
scared from it into the sea.

“Haul in! Haul in!” cried Starbuck again; “he’s rising.”

The lines, of which, hardly an instant before, not one hand’s breadth
could have been gained, were now in long quick coils flung back all
dripping into the boats, and soon the whale broke water within two
ship’s lengths of the hunters.

His motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion. In most land
animals there are certain valves or flood-gates in many of their veins,
whereby when wounded, the blood is in some degree at least instantly
shut off in certain directions. Not so with the whale; one of whose
peculiarities it is to have an entire non-valvular structure of the
blood-vessels, so that when pierced even by so small a point as a
harpoon, a deadly drain is at once begun upon his whole arterial
system; and when this is heightened by the extraordinary pressure of
water at a great distance below the surface, his life may be said to
pour from him in incessant streams. Yet so vast is the quantity of
blood in him, and so distant and numerous its interior fountains, that
he will keep thus bleeding and bleeding for a considerable period; even
as in a drought a river will flow, whose source is in the well-springs
of far-off and undiscernible hills. Even now, when the boats pulled
upon this whale, and perilously drew over his swaying flukes, and the
lances were darted into him, they were followed by steady jets from the
new made wound, which kept continually playing, while the natural
spout-hole in his head was only at intervals, however rapid, sending
its affrighted moisture into the air. From this last vent no blood yet
came, because no vital part of him had thus far been struck. His life,
as they significantly call it, was untouched.

As the boats now more closely surrounded him, the whole upper part of
his form, with much of it that is ordinarily submerged, was plainly
revealed. His eyes, or rather the places where his eyes had been, were
beheld. As strange misgrown masses gather in the knot-holes of the
noblest oaks when prostrate, so from the points which the whale’s eyes
had once occupied, now protruded blind bulbs, horribly pitiable to see.
But pity there was none. For all his old age, and his one arm, and his
blind eyes, he must die the death and be murdered, in order to light
the gay bridals and other merry-makings of men, and also to illuminate
the solemn churches that preach unconditional inoffensiveness by all to
all. Still rolling in his blood, at last he partially disclosed a
strangely discoloured bunch or protuberance, the size of a bushel, low
down on the flank.

“A nice spot,” cried Flask; “just let me prick him there once.”

“Avast!” cried Starbuck, “there’s no need of that!”

But humane Starbuck was too late. At the instant of the dart an
ulcerous jet shot from this cruel wound, and goaded by it into more
than sufferable anguish, the whale now spouting thick blood, with swift
fury blindly darted at the craft, bespattering them and their glorying
crews all over with showers of gore, capsizing Flask’s boat and marring
the bows. It was his death stroke. For, by this time, so spent was he
by loss of blood, that he helplessly rolled away from the wreck he had
made; lay panting on his side, impotently flapped with his stumped fin,
then over and over slowly revolved like a waning world; turned up the
white secrets of his belly; lay like a log, and died. It was most
piteous, that last expiring spout. As when by unseen hands the water is
gradually drawn off from some mighty fountain, and with half-stifled
melancholy gurglings the spray-column lowers and lowers to the
ground—so the last long dying spout of the whale.

Soon, while the crews were awaiting the arrival of the ship, the body
showed symptoms of sinking with all its treasures unrifled.
Immediately, by Starbuck’s orders, lines were secured to it at
different points, so that ere long every boat was a buoy; the sunken
whale being suspended a few inches beneath them by the cords. By very
heedful management, when the ship drew nigh, the whale was transferred
to her side, and was strongly secured there by the stiffest
fluke-chains, for it was plain that unless artificially upheld, the
body would at once sink to the bottom.

It so chanced that almost upon first cutting into him with the spade,
the entire length of a corroded harpoon was found imbedded in his
flesh, on the lower part of the bunch before described. But as the
stumps of harpoons are frequently found in the dead bodies of captured
whales, with the flesh perfectly healed around them, and no prominence
of any kind to denote their place; therefore, there must needs have
been some other unknown reason in the present case fully to account for
the ulceration alluded to. But still more curious was the fact of a
lance-head of stone being found in him, not far from the buried iron,
the flesh perfectly firm about it. Who had darted that stone lance? And
when? It might have been darted by some Nor’ West Indian long before
America was discovered.

What other marvels might have been rummaged out of this monstrous
cabinet there is no telling. But a sudden stop was put to further
discoveries, by the ship’s being unprecedentedly dragged over sideways
to the sea, owing to the body’s immensely increasing tendency to sink.
However, Starbuck, who had the ordering of affairs, hung on to it to
the last; hung on to it so resolutely, indeed, that when at length the
ship would have been capsized, if still persisting in locking arms with
the body; then, when the command was given to break clear from it, such
was the immovable strain upon the timber-heads to which the
fluke-chains and cables were fastened, that it was impossible to cast
them off. Meantime everything in the Pequod was aslant. To cross to the
other side of the deck was like walking up the steep gabled roof of a
house. The ship groaned and gasped. Many of the ivory inlayings of her
bulwarks and cabins were started from their places, by the unnatural
dislocation. In vain handspikes and crows were brought to bear upon the
immovable fluke-chains, to pry them adrift from the timberheads; and so
low had the whale now settled that the submerged ends could not be at
all approached, while every moment whole tons of ponderosity seemed
added to the sinking bulk, and the ship seemed on the point of going
over.

“Hold on, hold on, won’t ye?” cried Stubb to the body, “don’t be in
such a devil of a hurry to sink! By thunder, men, we must do something
or go for it. No use prying there; avast, I say with your handspikes,
and run one of ye for a prayer book and a pen-knife, and cut the big
chains.”

“Knife? Aye, aye,” cried Queequeg, and seizing the carpenter’s heavy
hatchet, he leaned out of a porthole, and steel to iron, began slashing
at the largest fluke-chains. But a few strokes, full of sparks, were
given, when the exceeding strain effected the rest. With a terrific
snap, every fastening went adrift; the ship righted, the carcase sank.

Now, this occasional inevitable sinking of the recently killed Sperm
Whale is a very curious thing; nor has any fisherman yet adequately
accounted for it. Usually the dead Sperm Whale floats with great
buoyancy, with its side or belly considerably elevated above the
surface. If the only whales that thus sank were old, meagre, and
broken-hearted creatures, their pads of lard diminished and all their
bones heavy and rheumatic; then you might with some reason assert that
this sinking is caused by an uncommon specific gravity in the fish so
sinking, consequent upon this absence of buoyant matter in him. But it
is not so. For young whales, in the highest health, and swelling with
noble aspirations, prematurely cut off in the warm flush and May of
life, with all their panting lard about them; even these brawny,
buoyant heroes do sometimes sink.

Be it said, however, that the Sperm Whale is far less liable to this
accident than any other species. Where one of that sort go down, twenty
Right Whales do. This difference in the species is no doubt imputable
in no small degree to the greater quantity of bone in the Right Whale;
his Venetian blinds alone sometimes weighing more than a ton; from this
incumbrance the Sperm Whale is wholly free. But there are instances
where, after the lapse of many hours or several days, the sunken whale
again rises, more buoyant than in life. But the reason of this is
obvious. Gases are generated in him; he swells to a prodigious
magnitude; becomes a sort of animal balloon. A line-of-battle ship
could hardly keep him under then. In the Shore Whaling, on soundings,
among the Bays of New Zealand, when a Right Whale gives token of
sinking, they fasten buoys to him, with plenty of rope; so that when
the body has gone down, they know where to look for it when it shall
have ascended again.

It was not long after the sinking of the body that a cry was heard from
the Pequod’s mast-heads, announcing that the Jungfrau was again
lowering her boats; though the only spout in sight was that of a
Fin-Back, belonging to the species of uncapturable whales, because of
its incredible power of swimming. Nevertheless, the Fin-Back’s spout is
so similar to the Sperm Whale’s, that by unskilful fishermen it is
often mistaken for it. And consequently Derick and all his host were
now in valiant chase of this unnearable brute. The Virgin crowding all
sail, made after her four young keels, and thus they all disappeared
far to leeward, still in bold, hopeful chase.

Oh! many are the Fin-Backs, and many are the Dericks, my friend.


CHAPTER 82. The Honor and Glory of Whaling.

There are some enterprises in which a careful disorderliness is the
true method.

The more I dive into this matter of whaling, and push my researches up
to the very spring-head of it so much the more am I impressed with its
great honorableness and antiquity; and especially when I find so many
great demi-gods and heroes, prophets of all sorts, who one way or other
have shed distinction upon it, I am transported with the reflection
that I myself belong, though but subordinately, to so emblazoned a
fraternity.

The gallant Perseus, a son of Jupiter, was the first whaleman; and to
the eternal honor of our calling be it said, that the first whale
attacked by our brotherhood was not killed with any sordid intent.
Those were the knightly days of our profession, when we only bore arms
to succor the distressed, and not to fill men’s lamp-feeders. Every one
knows the fine story of Perseus and Andromeda; how the lovely
Andromeda, the daughter of a king, was tied to a rock on the sea-coast,
and as Leviathan was in the very act of carrying her off, Perseus, the
prince of whalemen, intrepidly advancing, harpooned the monster, and
delivered and married the maid. It was an admirable artistic exploit,
rarely achieved by the best harpooneers of the present day; inasmuch as
this Leviathan was slain at the very first dart. And let no man doubt
this Arkite story; for in the ancient Joppa, now Jaffa, on the Syrian
coast, in one of the Pagan temples, there stood for many ages the vast
skeleton of a whale, which the city’s legends and all the inhabitants
asserted to be the identical bones of the monster that Perseus slew.
When the Romans took Joppa, the same skeleton was carried to Italy in
triumph. What seems most singular and suggestively important in this
story, is this: it was from Joppa that Jonah set sail.

Akin to the adventure of Perseus and Andromeda—indeed, by some supposed
to be indirectly derived from it—is that famous story of St. George and
the Dragon; which dragon I maintain to have been a whale; for in many
old chronicles whales and dragons are strangely jumbled together, and
often stand for each other. “Thou art as a lion of the waters, and as a
dragon of the sea,” saith Ezekiel; hereby, plainly meaning a whale; in
truth, some versions of the Bible use that word itself. Besides, it
would much subtract from the glory of the exploit had St. George but
encountered a crawling reptile of the land, instead of doing battle
with the great monster of the deep. Any man may kill a snake, but only
a Perseus, a St. George, a Coffin, have the heart in them to march
boldly up to a whale.

Let not the modern paintings of this scene mislead us; for though the
creature encountered by that valiant whaleman of old is vaguely
represented of a griffin-like shape, and though the battle is depicted
on land and the saint on horseback, yet considering the great ignorance
of those times, when the true form of the whale was unknown to artists;
and considering that as in Perseus’ case, St. George’s whale might have
crawled up out of the sea on the beach; and considering that the animal
ridden by St. George might have been only a large seal, or sea-horse;
bearing all this in mind, it will not appear altogether incompatible
with the sacred legend and the ancientest draughts of the scene, to
hold this so-called dragon no other than the great Leviathan himself.
In fact, placed before the strict and piercing truth, this whole story
will fare like that fish, flesh, and fowl idol of the Philistines,
Dagon by name; who being planted before the ark of Israel, his horse’s
head and both the palms of his hands fell off from him, and only the
stump or fishy part of him remained. Thus, then, one of our own noble
stamp, even a whaleman, is the tutelary guardian of England; and by
good rights, we harpooneers of Nantucket should be enrolled in the most
noble order of St. George. And therefore, let not the knights of that
honorable company (none of whom, I venture to say, have ever had to do
with a whale like their great patron), let them never eye a Nantucketer
with disdain, since even in our woollen frocks and tarred trowsers we
are much better entitled to St. George’s decoration than they.

Whether to admit Hercules among us or not, concerning this I long
remained dubious: for though according to the Greek mythologies, that
antique Crockett and Kit Carson—that brawny doer of rejoicing good
deeds, was swallowed down and thrown up by a whale; still, whether that
strictly makes a whaleman of him, that might be mooted. It nowhere
appears that he ever actually harpooned his fish, unless, indeed, from
the inside. Nevertheless, he may be deemed a sort of involuntary
whaleman; at any rate the whale caught him, if he did not the whale. I
claim him for one of our clan.

But, by the best contradictory authorities, this Grecian story of
Hercules and the whale is considered to be derived from the still more
ancient Hebrew story of Jonah and the whale; and vice versâ; certainly
they are very similar. If I claim the demi-god then, why not the
prophet?

Nor do heroes, saints, demigods, and prophets alone comprise the whole
roll of our order. Our grand master is still to be named; for like
royal kings of old times, we find the head waters of our fraternity in
nothing short of the great gods themselves. That wondrous oriental
story is now to be rehearsed from the Shaster, which gives us the dread
Vishnoo, one of the three persons in the godhead of the Hindoos; gives
us this divine Vishnoo himself for our Lord;—Vishnoo, who, by the first
of his ten earthly incarnations, has for ever set apart and sanctified
the whale. When Brahma, or the God of Gods, saith the Shaster, resolved
to recreate the world after one of its periodical dissolutions, he gave
birth to Vishnoo, to preside over the work; but the Vedas, or mystical
books, whose perusal would seem to have been indispensable to Vishnoo
before beginning the creation, and which therefore must have contained
something in the shape of practical hints to young architects, these
Vedas were lying at the bottom of the waters; so Vishnoo became
incarnate in a whale, and sounding down in him to the uttermost depths,
rescued the sacred volumes. Was not this Vishnoo a whaleman, then? even
as a man who rides a horse is called a horseman?

Perseus, St. George, Hercules, Jonah, and Vishnoo! there’s a
member-roll for you! What club but the whaleman’s can head off like
that?


CHAPTER 83. Jonah Historically Regarded.

Reference was made to the historical story of Jonah and the whale in
the preceding chapter. Now some Nantucketers rather distrust this
historical story of Jonah and the whale. But then there were some
sceptical Greeks and Romans, who, standing out from the orthodox pagans
of their times, equally doubted the story of Hercules and the whale,
and Arion and the dolphin; and yet their doubting those traditions did
not make those traditions one whit the less facts, for all that.

One old Sag-Harbor whaleman’s chief reason for questioning the Hebrew
story was this:—He had one of those quaint old-fashioned Bibles,
embellished with curious, unscientific plates; one of which represented
Jonah’s whale with two spouts in his head—a peculiarity only true with
respect to a species of the Leviathan (the Right Whale, and the
varieties of that order), concerning which the fishermen have this
saying, “A penny roll would choke him”; his swallow is so very small.
But, to this, Bishop Jebb’s anticipative answer is ready. It is not
necessary, hints the Bishop, that we consider Jonah as tombed in the
whale’s belly, but as temporarily lodged in some part of his mouth. And
this seems reasonable enough in the good Bishop. For truly, the Right
Whale’s mouth would accommodate a couple of whist-tables, and
comfortably seat all the players. Possibly, too, Jonah might have
ensconced himself in a hollow tooth; but, on second thoughts, the Right
Whale is toothless.

Another reason which Sag-Harbor (he went by that name) urged for his
want of faith in this matter of the prophet, was something obscurely in
reference to his incarcerated body and the whale’s gastric juices. But
this objection likewise falls to the ground, because a German exegetist
supposes that Jonah must have taken refuge in the floating body of a
_dead_ whale—even as the French soldiers in the Russian campaign turned
their dead horses into tents, and crawled into them. Besides, it has
been divined by other continental commentators, that when Jonah was
thrown overboard from the Joppa ship, he straightway effected his
escape to another vessel near by, some vessel with a whale for a
figure-head; and, I would add, possibly called “The Whale,” as some
craft are nowadays christened the “Shark,” the “Gull,” the “Eagle.” Nor
have there been wanting learned exegetists who have opined that the
whale mentioned in the book of Jonah merely meant a life-preserver—an
inflated bag of wind—which the endangered prophet swam to, and so was
saved from a watery doom. Poor Sag-Harbor, therefore, seems worsted all
round. But he had still another reason for his want of faith. It was
this, if I remember right: Jonah was swallowed by the whale in the
Mediterranean Sea, and after three days he was vomited up somewhere
within three days’ journey of Nineveh, a city on the Tigris, very much
more than three days’ journey across from the nearest point of the
Mediterranean coast. How is that?

But was there no other way for the whale to land the prophet within
that short distance of Nineveh? Yes. He might have carried him round by
the way of the Cape of Good Hope. But not to speak of the passage
through the whole length of the Mediterranean, and another passage up
the Persian Gulf and Red Sea, such a supposition would involve the
complete circumnavigation of all Africa in three days, not to speak of
the Tigris waters, near the site of Nineveh, being too shallow for any
whale to swim in. Besides, this idea of Jonah’s weathering the Cape of
Good Hope at so early a day would wrest the honor of the discovery of
that great headland from Bartholomew Diaz, its reputed discoverer, and
so make modern history a liar.

But all these foolish arguments of old Sag-Harbor only evinced his
foolish pride of reason—a thing still more reprehensible in him, seeing
that he had but little learning except what he had picked up from the
sun and the sea. I say it only shows his foolish, impious pride, and
abominable, devilish rebellion against the reverend clergy. For by a
Portuguese Catholic priest, this very idea of Jonah’s going to Nineveh
via the Cape of Good Hope was advanced as a signal magnification of the
general miracle. And so it was. Besides, to this day, the highly
enlightened Turks devoutly believe in the historical story of Jonah.
And some three centuries ago, an English traveller in old Harris’s
Voyages, speaks of a Turkish Mosque built in honor of Jonah, in which
Mosque was a miraculous lamp that burnt without any oil.


CHAPTER 84. Pitchpoling.

To make them run easily and swiftly, the axles of carriages are
anointed; and for much the same purpose, some whalers perform an
analogous operation upon their boat; they grease the bottom. Nor is it
to be doubted that as such a procedure can do no harm, it may possibly
be of no contemptible advantage; considering that oil and water are
hostile; that oil is a sliding thing, and that the object in view is to
make the boat slide bravely. Queequeg believed strongly in anointing
his boat, and one morning not long after the German ship Jungfrau
disappeared, took more than customary pains in that occupation;
crawling under its bottom, where it hung over the side, and rubbing in
the unctuousness as though diligently seeking to insure a crop of hair
from the craft’s bald keel. He seemed to be working in obedience to
some particular presentiment. Nor did it remain unwarranted by the
event.

Towards noon whales were raised; but so soon as the ship sailed down to
them, they turned and fled with swift precipitancy; a disordered
flight, as of Cleopatra’s barges from Actium.

Nevertheless, the boats pursued, and Stubb’s was foremost. By great
exertion, Tashtego at last succeeded in planting one iron; but the
stricken whale, without at all sounding, still continued his horizontal
flight, with added fleetness. Such unintermitted strainings upon the
planted iron must sooner or later inevitably extract it. It became
imperative to lance the flying whale, or be content to lose him. But to
haul the boat up to his flank was impossible, he swam so fast and
furious. What then remained?

Of all the wondrous devices and dexterities, the sleights of hand and
countless subtleties, to which the veteran whaleman is so often forced,
none exceed that fine manœuvre with the lance called pitchpoling. Small
sword, or broad sword, in all its exercises boasts nothing like it. It
is only indispensable with an inveterate running whale; its grand fact
and feature is the wonderful distance to which the long lance is
accurately darted from a violently rocking, jerking boat, under extreme
headway. Steel and wood included, the entire spear is some ten or
twelve feet in length; the staff is much slighter than that of the
harpoon, and also of a lighter material—pine. It is furnished with a
small rope called a warp, of considerable length, by which it can be
hauled back to the hand after darting.

But before going further, it is important to mention here, that though
the harpoon may be pitchpoled in the same way with the lance, yet it is
seldom done; and when done, is still less frequently successful, on
account of the greater weight and inferior length of the harpoon as
compared with the lance, which in effect become serious drawbacks. As a
general thing, therefore, you must first get fast to a whale, before
any pitchpoling comes into play.

Look now at Stubb; a man who from his humorous, deliberate coolness and
equanimity in the direst emergencies, was specially qualified to excel
in pitchpoling. Look at him; he stands upright in the tossed bow of the
flying boat; wrapt in fleecy foam, the towing whale is forty feet
ahead. Handling the long lance lightly, glancing twice or thrice along
its length to see if it be exactly straight, Stubb whistlingly gathers
up the coil of the warp in one hand, so as to secure its free end in
his grasp, leaving the rest unobstructed. Then holding the lance full
before his waistband’s middle, he levels it at the whale; when,
covering him with it, he steadily depresses the butt-end in his hand,
thereby elevating the point till the weapon stands fairly balanced upon
his palm, fifteen feet in the air. He minds you somewhat of a juggler,
balancing a long staff on his chin. Next moment with a rapid, nameless
impulse, in a superb lofty arch the bright steel spans the foaming
distance, and quivers in the life spot of the whale. Instead of
sparkling water, he now spouts red blood.

“That drove the spigot out of him!” cried Stubb. “’Tis July’s immortal
Fourth; all fountains must run wine today! Would now, it were old
Orleans whiskey, or old Ohio, or unspeakable old Monongahela! Then,
Tashtego, lad, I’d have ye hold a canakin to the jet, and we’d drink
round it! Yea, verily, hearts alive, we’d brew choice punch in the
spread of his spout-hole there, and from that live punch-bowl quaff the
living stuff.”

Again and again to such gamesome talk, the dexterous dart is repeated,
the spear returning to its master like a greyhound held in skilful
leash. The agonized whale goes into his flurry; the tow-line is
slackened, and the pitchpoler dropping astern, folds his hands, and
mutely watches the monster die.


CHAPTER 85. The Fountain.

That for six thousand years—and no one knows how many millions of ages
before—the great whales should have been spouting all over the sea, and
sprinkling and mistifying the gardens of the deep, as with so many
sprinkling or mistifying pots; and that for some centuries back,
thousands of hunters should have been close by the fountain of the
whale, watching these sprinklings and spoutings—that all this should
be, and yet, that down to this blessed minute (fifteen and a quarter
minutes past one o’clock P.M. of this sixteenth day of December, A.D.
1851), it should still remain a problem, whether these spoutings are,
after all, really water, or nothing but vapor—this is surely a
noteworthy thing.

Let us, then, look at this matter, along with some interesting items
contingent. Every one knows that by the peculiar cunning of their
gills, the finny tribes in general breathe the air which at all times
is combined with the element in which they swim; hence, a herring or a
cod might live a century, and never once raise its head above the
surface. But owing to his marked internal structure which gives him
regular lungs, like a human being’s, the whale can only live by
inhaling the disengaged air in the open atmosphere. Wherefore the
necessity for his periodical visits to the upper world. But he cannot
in any degree breathe through his mouth, for, in his ordinary attitude,
the Sperm Whale’s mouth is buried at least eight feet beneath the
surface; and what is still more, his windpipe has no connexion with his
mouth. No, he breathes through his spiracle alone; and this is on the
top of his head.

If I say, that in any creature breathing is only a function
indispensable to vitality, inasmuch as it withdraws from the air a
certain element, which being subsequently brought into contact with the
blood imparts to the blood its vivifying principle, I do not think I
shall err; though I may possibly use some superfluous scientific words.
Assume it, and it follows that if all the blood in a man could be
aerated with one breath, he might then seal up his nostrils and not
fetch another for a considerable time. That is to say, he would then
live without breathing. Anomalous as it may seem, this is precisely the
case with the whale, who systematically lives, by intervals, his full
hour and more (when at the bottom) without drawing a single breath, or
so much as in any way inhaling a particle of air; for, remember, he has
no gills. How is this? Between his ribs and on each side of his spine
he is supplied with a remarkable involved Cretan labyrinth of
vermicelli-like vessels, which vessels, when he quits the surface, are
completely distended with oxygenated blood. So that for an hour or
more, a thousand fathoms in the sea, he carries a surplus stock of
vitality in him, just as the camel crossing the waterless desert
carries a surplus supply of drink for future use in its four
supplementary stomachs. The anatomical fact of this labyrinth is
indisputable; and that the supposition founded upon it is reasonable
and true, seems the more cogent to me, when I consider the otherwise
inexplicable obstinacy of that leviathan in _having his spoutings out_,
as the fishermen phrase it. This is what I mean. If unmolested, upon
rising to the surface, the Sperm Whale will continue there for a period
of time exactly uniform with all his other unmolested risings. Say he
stays eleven minutes, and jets seventy times, that is, respires seventy
breaths; then whenever he rises again, he will be sure to have his
seventy breaths over again, to a minute. Now, if after he fetches a few
breaths you alarm him, so that he sounds, he will be always dodging up
again to make good his regular allowance of air. And not till those
seventy breaths are told, will he finally go down to stay out his full
term below. Remark, however, that in different individuals these rates
are different; but in any one they are alike. Now, why should the whale
thus insist upon having his spoutings out, unless it be to replenish
his reservoir of air, ere descending for good? How obvious is it, too,
that this necessity for the whale’s rising exposes him to all the fatal
hazards of the chase. For not by hook or by net could this vast
leviathan be caught, when sailing a thousand fathoms beneath the
sunlight. Not so much thy skill, then, O hunter, as the great
necessities that strike the victory to thee!

In man, breathing is incessantly going on—one breath only serving for
two or three pulsations; so that whatever other business he has to
attend to, waking or sleeping, breathe he must, or die he will. But the
Sperm Whale only breathes about one seventh or Sunday of his time.

It has been said that the whale only breathes through his spout-hole;
if it could truthfully be added that his spouts are mixed with water,
then I opine we should be furnished with the reason why his sense of
smell seems obliterated in him; for the only thing about him that at
all answers to his nose is that identical spout-hole; and being so
clogged with two elements, it could not be expected to have the power
of smelling. But owing to the mystery of the spout—whether it be water
or whether it be vapor—no absolute certainty can as yet be arrived at
on this head. Sure it is, nevertheless, that the Sperm Whale has no
proper olfactories. But what does he want of them? No roses, no
violets, no Cologne-water in the sea.

Furthermore, as his windpipe solely opens into the tube of his spouting
canal, and as that long canal—like the grand Erie Canal—is furnished
with a sort of locks (that open and shut) for the downward retention of
air or the upward exclusion of water, therefore the whale has no voice;
unless you insult him by saying, that when he so strangely rumbles, he
talks through his nose. But then again, what has the whale to say?
Seldom have I known any profound being that had anything to say to this
world, unless forced to stammer out something by way of getting a
living. Oh! happy that the world is such an excellent listener!

Now, the spouting canal of the Sperm Whale, chiefly intended as it is
for the conveyance of air, and for several feet laid along,
horizontally, just beneath the upper surface of his head, and a little
to one side; this curious canal is very much like a gas-pipe laid down
in a city on one side of a street. But the question returns whether
this gas-pipe is also a water-pipe; in other words, whether the spout
of the Sperm Whale is the mere vapor of the exhaled breath, or whether
that exhaled breath is mixed with water taken in at the mouth, and
discharged through the spiracle. It is certain that the mouth
indirectly communicates with the spouting canal; but it cannot be
proved that this is for the purpose of discharging water through the
spiracle. Because the greatest necessity for so doing would seem to be,
when in feeding he accidentally takes in water. But the Sperm Whale’s
food is far beneath the surface, and there he cannot spout even if he
would. Besides, if you regard him very closely, and time him with your
watch, you will find that when unmolested, there is an undeviating
rhyme between the periods of his jets and the ordinary periods of
respiration.

But why pester one with all this reasoning on the subject? Speak out!
You have seen him spout; then declare what the spout is; can you not
tell water from air? My dear sir, in this world it is not so easy to
settle these plain things. I have ever found your plain things the
knottiest of all. And as for this whale spout, you might almost stand
in it, and yet be undecided as to what it is precisely.

The central body of it is hidden in the snowy sparkling mist enveloping
it; and how can you certainly tell whether any water falls from it,
when, always, when you are close enough to a whale to get a close view
of his spout, he is in a prodigious commotion, the water cascading all
around him. And if at such times you should think that you really
perceived drops of moisture in the spout, how do you know that they are
not merely condensed from its vapor; or how do you know that they are
not those identical drops superficially lodged in the spout-hole
fissure, which is countersunk into the summit of the whale’s head? For
even when tranquilly swimming through the mid-day sea in a calm, with
his elevated hump sun-dried as a dromedary’s in the desert; even then,
the whale always carries a small basin of water on his head, as under a
blazing sun you will sometimes see a cavity in a rock filled up with
rain.

Nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curious touching the
precise nature of the whale spout. It will not do for him to be peering
into it, and putting his face in it. You cannot go with your pitcher to
this fountain and fill it, and bring it away. For even when coming into
slight contact with the outer, vapory shreds of the jet, which will
often happen, your skin will feverishly smart, from the acridness of
the thing so touching it. And I know one, who coming into still closer
contact with the spout, whether with some scientific object in view, or
otherwise, I cannot say, the skin peeled off from his cheek and arm.
Wherefore, among whalemen, the spout is deemed poisonous; they try to
evade it. Another thing; I have heard it said, and I do not much doubt
it, that if the jet is fairly spouted into your eyes, it will blind
you. The wisest thing the investigator can do then, it seems to me, is
to let this deadly spout alone.

Still, we can hypothesize, even if we cannot prove and establish. My
hypothesis is this: that the spout is nothing but mist. And besides
other reasons, to this conclusion I am impelled, by considerations
touching the great inherent dignity and sublimity of the Sperm Whale; I
account him no common, shallow being, inasmuch as it is an undisputed
fact that he is never found on soundings, or near shores; all other
whales sometimes are. He is both ponderous and profound. And I am
convinced that from the heads of all ponderous profound beings, such as
Plato, Pyrrho, the Devil, Jupiter, Dante, and so on, there always goes
up a certain semi-visible steam, while in the act of thinking deep
thoughts. While composing a little treatise on Eternity, I had the
curiosity to place a mirror before me; and ere long saw reflected
there, a curious involved worming and undulation in the atmosphere over
my head. The invariable moisture of my hair, while plunged in deep
thought, after six cups of hot tea in my thin shingled attic, of an
August noon; this seems an additional argument for the above
supposition.

And how nobly it raises our conceit of the mighty, misty monster, to
behold him solemnly sailing through a calm tropical sea; his vast, mild
head overhung by a canopy of vapor, engendered by his incommunicable
contemplations, and that vapor—as you will sometimes see it—glorified
by a rainbow, as if Heaven itself had put its seal upon his thoughts.
For, d’ye see, rainbows do not visit the clear air; they only irradiate
vapor. And so, through all the thick mists of the dim doubts in my
mind, divine intuitions now and then shoot, enkindling my fog with a
heavenly ray. And for this I thank God; for all have doubts; many deny;
but doubts or denials, few along with them, have intuitions. Doubts of
all things earthly, and intuitions of some things heavenly; this
combination makes neither believer nor infidel, but makes a man who
regards them both with equal eye.


CHAPTER 86. The Tail.

Other poets have warbled the praises of the soft eye of the antelope,
and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights; less celestial,
I celebrate a tail.

Reckoning the largest sized Sperm Whale’s tail to begin at that point
of the trunk where it tapers to about the girth of a man, it comprises
upon its upper surface alone, an area of at least fifty square feet.
The compact round body of its root expands into two broad, firm, flat
palms or flukes, gradually shoaling away to less than an inch in
thickness. At the crotch or junction, these flukes slightly overlap,
then sideways recede from each other like wings, leaving a wide vacancy
between. In no living thing are the lines of beauty more exquisitely
defined than in the crescentic borders of these flukes. At its utmost
expansion in the full grown whale, the tail will considerably exceed
twenty feet across.

The entire member seems a dense webbed bed of welded sinews; but cut
into it, and you find that three distinct strata compose it:—upper,
middle, and lower. The fibres in the upper and lower layers, are long
and horizontal; those of the middle one, very short, and running
crosswise between the outside layers. This triune structure, as much as
anything else, imparts power to the tail. To the student of old Roman
walls, the middle layer will furnish a curious parallel to the thin
course of tiles always alternating with the stone in those wonderful
relics of the antique, and which undoubtedly contribute so much to the
great strength of the masonry.

But as if this vast local power in the tendinous tail were not enough,
the whole bulk of the leviathan is knit over with a warp and woof of
muscular fibres and filaments, which passing on either side the loins
and running down into the flukes, insensibly blend with them, and
largely contribute to their might; so that in the tail the confluent
measureless force of the whole whale seems concentrated to a point.
Could annihilation occur to matter, this were the thing to do it.

Nor does this—its amazing strength, at all tend to cripple the graceful
flexion of its motions; where infantileness of ease undulates through a
Titanism of power. On the contrary, those motions derive their most
appalling beauty from it. Real strength never impairs beauty or
harmony, but it often bestows it; and in everything imposingly
beautiful, strength has much to do with the magic. Take away the tied
tendons that all over seem bursting from the marble in the carved
Hercules, and its charm would be gone. As devout Eckerman lifted the
linen sheet from the naked corpse of Goethe, he was overwhelmed with
the massive chest of the man, that seemed as a Roman triumphal arch.
When Angelo paints even God the Father in human form, mark what
robustness is there. And whatever they may reveal of the divine love in
the Son, the soft, curled, hermaphroditical Italian pictures, in which
his idea has been most successfully embodied; these pictures, so
destitute as they are of all brawniness, hint nothing of any power, but
the mere negative, feminine one of submission and endurance, which on
all hands it is conceded, form the peculiar practical virtues of his
teachings.

Such is the subtle elasticity of the organ I treat of, that whether
wielded in sport, or in earnest, or in anger, whatever be the mood it
be in, its flexions are invariably marked by exceeding grace. Therein
no fairy’s arm can transcend it.

Five great motions are peculiar to it. First, when used as a fin for
progression; Second, when used as a mace in battle; Third, in sweeping;
Fourth, in lobtailing; Fifth, in peaking flukes.

First: Being horizontal in its position, the Leviathan’s tail acts in a
different manner from the tails of all other sea creatures. It never
wriggles. In man or fish, wriggling is a sign of inferiority. To the
whale, his tail is the sole means of propulsion. Scroll-wise coiled
forwards beneath the body, and then rapidly sprung backwards, it is
this which gives that singular darting, leaping motion to the monster
when furiously swimming. His side-fins only serve to steer by.

Second: It is a little significant, that while one sperm whale only
fights another sperm whale with his head and jaw, nevertheless, in his
conflicts with man, he chiefly and contemptuously uses his tail. In
striking at a boat, he swiftly curves away his flukes from it, and the
blow is only inflicted by the recoil. If it be made in the unobstructed
air, especially if it descend to its mark, the stroke is then simply
irresistible. No ribs of man or boat can withstand it. Your only
salvation lies in eluding it; but if it comes sideways through the
opposing water, then partly owing to the light buoyancy of the
whale-boat, and the elasticity of its materials, a cracked rib or a
dashed plank or two, a sort of stitch in the side, is generally the
most serious result. These submerged side blows are so often received
in the fishery, that they are accounted mere child’s play. Some one
strips off a frock, and the hole is stopped.

Third: I cannot demonstrate it, but it seems to me, that in the whale
the sense of touch is concentrated in the tail; for in this respect
there is a delicacy in it only equalled by the daintiness of the
elephant’s trunk. This delicacy is chiefly evinced in the action of
sweeping, when in maidenly gentleness the whale with a certain soft
slowness moves his immense flukes from side to side upon the surface of
the sea; and if he feel but a sailor’s whisker, woe to that sailor,
whiskers and all. What tenderness there is in that preliminary touch!
Had this tail any prehensile power, I should straightway bethink me of
Darmonodes’ elephant that so frequented the flower-market, and with low
salutations presented nosegays to damsels, and then caressed their
zones. On more accounts than one, a pity it is that the whale does not
possess this prehensile virtue in his tail; for I have heard of yet
another elephant, that when wounded in the fight, curved round his
trunk and extracted the dart.

Fourth: Stealing unawares upon the whale in the fancied security of the
middle of solitary seas, you find him unbent from the vast corpulence
of his dignity, and kitten-like, he plays on the ocean as if it were a
hearth. But still you see his power in his play. The broad palms of his
tail are flirted high into the air; then smiting the surface, the
thunderous concussion resounds for miles. You would almost think a
great gun had been discharged; and if you noticed the light wreath of
vapor from the spiracle at his other extremity, you would think that
that was the smoke from the touch-hole.

Fifth: As in the ordinary floating posture of the leviathan the flukes
lie considerably below the level of his back, they are then completely
out of sight beneath the surface; but when he is about to plunge into
the deeps, his entire flukes with at least thirty feet of his body are
tossed erect in the air, and so remain vibrating a moment, till they
downwards shoot out of view. Excepting the sublime _breach_—somewhere
else to be described—this peaking of the whale’s flukes is perhaps the
grandest sight to be seen in all animated nature. Out of the bottomless
profundities the gigantic tail seems spasmodically snatching at the
highest heaven. So in dreams, have I seen majestic Satan thrusting
forth his tormented colossal claw from the flame Baltic of Hell. But in
gazing at such scenes, it is all in all what mood you are in; if in the
Dantean, the devils will occur to you; if in that of Isaiah, the
archangels. Standing at the mast-head of my ship during a sunrise that
crimsoned sky and sea, I once saw a large herd of whales in the east,
all heading towards the sun, and for a moment vibrating in concert with
peaked flukes. As it seemed to me at the time, such a grand embodiment
of adoration of the gods was never beheld, even in Persia, the home of
the fire worshippers. As Ptolemy Philopater testified of the African
elephant, I then testified of the whale, pronouncing him the most
devout of all beings. For according to King Juba, the military
elephants of antiquity often hailed the morning with their trunks
uplifted in the profoundest silence.

The chance comparison in this chapter, between the whale and the
elephant, so far as some aspects of the tail of the one and the trunk
of the other are concerned, should not tend to place those two opposite
organs on an equality, much less the creatures to which they
respectively belong. For as the mightiest elephant is but a terrier to
Leviathan, so, compared with Leviathan’s tail, his trunk is but the
stalk of a lily. The most direful blow from the elephant’s trunk were
as the playful tap of a fan, compared with the measureless crush and
crash of the sperm whale’s ponderous flukes, which in repeated
instances have one after the other hurled entire boats with all their
oars and crews into the air, very much as an Indian juggler tosses his
balls.*

*Though all comparison in the way of general bulk between the whale and
the elephant is preposterous, inasmuch as in that particular the
elephant stands in much the same respect to the whale that a dog does
to the elephant; nevertheless, there are not wanting some points of
curious similitude; among these is the spout. It is well known that the
elephant will often draw up water or dust in his trunk, and then
elevating it, jet it forth in a stream.

The more I consider this mighty tail, the more do I deplore my
inability to express it. At times there are gestures in it, which,
though they would well grace the hand of man, remain wholly
inexplicable. In an extensive herd, so remarkable, occasionally, are
these mystic gestures, that I have heard hunters who have declared them
akin to Free-Mason signs and symbols; that the whale, indeed, by these
methods intelligently conversed with the world. Nor are there wanting
other motions of the whale in his general body, full of strangeness,
and unaccountable to his most experienced assailant. Dissect him how I
may, then, I but go skin deep; I know him not, and never will. But if I
know not even the tail of this whale, how understand his head? much
more, how comprehend his face, when face he has none? Thou shalt see my
back parts, my tail, he seems to say, but my face shall not be seen.
But I cannot completely make out his back parts; and hint what he will
about his face, I say again he has no face.


CHAPTER 87. The Grand Armada.

The long and narrow peninsula of Malacca, extending south-eastward from
the territories of Birmah, forms the most southerly point of all Asia.
In a continuous line from that peninsula stretch the long islands of
Sumatra, Java, Bally, and Timor; which, with many others, form a vast
mole, or rampart, lengthwise connecting Asia with Australia, and
dividing the long unbroken Indian ocean from the thickly studded
oriental archipelagoes. This rampart is pierced by several sally-ports
for the convenience of ships and whales; conspicuous among which are
the straits of Sunda and Malacca. By the straits of Sunda, chiefly,
vessels bound to China from the west, emerge into the China seas.

Those narrow straits of Sunda divide Sumatra from Java; and standing
midway in that vast rampart of islands, buttressed by that bold green
promontory, known to seamen as Java Head; they not a little correspond
to the central gateway opening into some vast walled empire: and
considering the inexhaustible wealth of spices, and silks, and jewels,
and gold, and ivory, with which the thousand islands of that oriental
sea are enriched, it seems a significant provision of nature, that such
treasures, by the very formation of the land, should at least bear the
appearance, however ineffectual, of being guarded from the all-grasping
western world. The shores of the Straits of Sunda are unsupplied with
those domineering fortresses which guard the entrances to the
Mediterranean, the Baltic, and the Propontis. Unlike the Danes, these
Orientals do not demand the obsequious homage of lowered top-sails from
the endless procession of ships before the wind, which for centuries
past, by night and by day, have passed between the islands of Sumatra
and Java, freighted with the costliest cargoes of the east. But while
they freely waive a ceremonial like this, they do by no means renounce
their claim to more solid tribute.

Time out of mind the piratical proas of the Malays, lurking among the
low shaded coves and islets of Sumatra, have sallied out upon the
vessels sailing through the straits, fiercely demanding tribute at the
point of their spears. Though by the repeated bloody chastisements they
have received at the hands of European cruisers, the audacity of these
corsairs has of late been somewhat repressed; yet, even at the present
day, we occasionally hear of English and American vessels, which, in
those waters, have been remorselessly boarded and pillaged.

With a fair, fresh wind, the Pequod was now drawing nigh to these
straits; Ahab purposing to pass through them into the Javan sea, and
thence, cruising northwards, over waters known to be frequented here
and there by the Sperm Whale, sweep inshore by the Philippine Islands,
and gain the far coast of Japan, in time for the great whaling season
there. By these means, the circumnavigating Pequod would sweep almost
all the known Sperm Whale cruising grounds of the world, previous to
descending upon the Line in the Pacific; where Ahab, though everywhere
else foiled in his pursuit, firmly counted upon giving battle to Moby
Dick, in the sea he was most known to frequent; and at a season when he
might most reasonably be presumed to be haunting it.

But how now? in this zoned quest, does Ahab touch no land? does his
crew drink air? Surely, he will stop for water. Nay. For a long time,
now, the circus-running sun has raced within his fiery ring, and needs
no sustenance but what’s in himself. So Ahab. Mark this, too, in the
whaler. While other hulls are loaded down with alien stuff, to be
transferred to foreign wharves; the world-wandering whale-ship carries
no cargo but herself and crew, their weapons and their wants. She has a
whole lake’s contents bottled in her ample hold. She is ballasted with
utilities; not altogether with unusable pig-lead and kentledge. She
carries years’ water in her. Clear old prime Nantucket water; which,
when three years afloat, the Nantucketer, in the Pacific, prefers to
drink before the brackish fluid, but yesterday rafted off in casks,
from the Peruvian or Indian streams. Hence it is, that, while other
ships may have gone to China from New York, and back again, touching at
a score of ports, the whale-ship, in all that interval, may not have
sighted one grain of soil; her crew having seen no man but floating
seamen like themselves. So that did you carry them the news that
another flood had come; they would only answer—“Well, boys, here’s the
ark!”

Now, as many Sperm Whales had been captured off the western coast of
Java, in the near vicinity of the Straits of Sunda; indeed, as most of
the ground, roundabout, was generally recognised by the fishermen as an
excellent spot for cruising; therefore, as the Pequod gained more and
more upon Java Head, the look-outs were repeatedly hailed, and
admonished to keep wide awake. But though the green palmy cliffs of the
land soon loomed on the starboard bow, and with delighted nostrils the
fresh cinnamon was snuffed in the air, yet not a single jet was
descried. Almost renouncing all thought of falling in with any game
hereabouts, the ship had well nigh entered the straits, when the
customary cheering cry was heard from aloft, and ere long a spectacle
of singular magnificence saluted us.

But here be it premised, that owing to the unwearied activity with
which of late they have been hunted over all four oceans, the Sperm
Whales, instead of almost invariably sailing in small detached
companies, as in former times, are now frequently met with in extensive
herds, sometimes embracing so great a multitude, that it would almost
seem as if numerous nations of them had sworn solemn league and
covenant for mutual assistance and protection. To this aggregation of
the Sperm Whale into such immense caravans, may be imputed the
circumstance that even in the best cruising grounds, you may now
sometimes sail for weeks and months together, without being greeted by
a single spout; and then be suddenly saluted by what sometimes seems
thousands on thousands.

Broad on both bows, at the distance of some two or three miles, and
forming a great semicircle, embracing one half of the level horizon, a
continuous chain of whale-jets were up-playing and sparkling in the
noon-day air. Unlike the straight perpendicular twin-jets of the Right
Whale, which, dividing at top, fall over in two branches, like the
cleft drooping boughs of a willow, the single forward-slanting spout of
the Sperm Whale presents a thick curled bush of white mist, continually
rising and falling away to leeward.

Seen from the Pequod’s deck, then, as she would rise on a high hill of
the sea, this host of vapory spouts, individually curling up into the
air, and beheld through a blending atmosphere of bluish haze, showed
like the thousand cheerful chimneys of some dense metropolis, descried
of a balmy autumnal morning, by some horseman on a height.

As marching armies approaching an unfriendly defile in the mountains,
accelerate their march, all eagerness to place that perilous passage in
their rear, and once more expand in comparative security upon the
plain; even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hurrying forward
through the straits; gradually contracting the wings of their
semicircle, and swimming on, in one solid, but still crescentic centre.

Crowding all sail the Pequod pressed after them; the harpooneers
handling their weapons, and loudly cheering from the heads of their yet
suspended boats. If the wind only held, little doubt had they, that
chased through these Straits of Sunda, the vast host would only deploy
into the Oriental seas to witness the capture of not a few of their
number. And who could tell whether, in that congregated caravan, Moby
Dick himself might not temporarily be swimming, like the worshipped
white-elephant in the coronation procession of the Siamese! So with
stun-sail piled on stun-sail, we sailed along, driving these leviathans
before us; when, of a sudden, the voice of Tashtego was heard, loudly
directing attention to something in our wake.

Corresponding to the crescent in our van, we beheld another in our
rear. It seemed formed of detached white vapors, rising and falling
something like the spouts of the whales; only they did not so
completely come and go; for they constantly hovered, without finally
disappearing. Levelling his glass at this sight, Ahab quickly revolved
in his pivot-hole, crying, “Aloft there, and rig whips and buckets to
wet the sails;—Malays, sir, and after us!”

As if too long lurking behind the headlands, till the Pequod should
fairly have entered the straits, these rascally Asiatics were now in
hot pursuit, to make up for their over-cautious delay. But when the
swift Pequod, with a fresh leading wind, was herself in hot chase; how
very kind of these tawny philanthropists to assist in speeding her on
to her own chosen pursuit,—mere riding-whips and rowels to her, that
they were. As with glass under arm, Ahab to-and-fro paced the deck; in
his forward turn beholding the monsters he chased, and in the after one
the bloodthirsty pirates chasing _him_; some such fancy as the above
seemed his. And when he glanced upon the green walls of the watery
defile in which the ship was then sailing, and bethought him that
through that gate lay the route to his vengeance, and beheld, how that
through that same gate he was now both chasing and being chased to his
deadly end; and not only that, but a herd of remorseless wild pirates
and inhuman atheistical devils were infernally cheering him on with
their curses;—when all these conceits had passed through his brain,
Ahab’s brow was left gaunt and ribbed, like the black sand beach after
some stormy tide has been gnawing it, without being able to drag the
firm thing from its place.

But thoughts like these troubled very few of the reckless crew; and
when, after steadily dropping and dropping the pirates astern, the
Pequod at last shot by the vivid green Cockatoo Point on the Sumatra
side, emerging at last upon the broad waters beyond; then, the
harpooneers seemed more to grieve that the swift whales had been
gaining upon the ship, than to rejoice that the ship had so
victoriously gained upon the Malays. But still driving on in the wake
of the whales, at length they seemed abating their speed; gradually the
ship neared them; and the wind now dying away, word was passed to
spring to the boats. But no sooner did the herd, by some presumed
wonderful instinct of the Sperm Whale, become notified of the three
keels that were after them,—though as yet a mile in their rear,—than
they rallied again, and forming in close ranks and battalions, so that
their spouts all looked like flashing lines of stacked bayonets, moved
on with redoubled velocity.

Stripped to our shirts and drawers, we sprang to the white-ash, and
after several hours’ pulling were almost disposed to renounce the
chase, when a general pausing commotion among the whales gave animating
token that they were now at last under the influence of that strange
perplexity of inert irresolution, which, when the fishermen perceive it
in the whale, they say he is gallied. The compact martial columns in
which they had been hitherto rapidly and steadily swimming, were now
broken up in one measureless rout; and like King Porus’ elephants in
the Indian battle with Alexander, they seemed going mad with
consternation. In all directions expanding in vast irregular circles,
and aimlessly swimming hither and thither, by their short thick
spoutings, they plainly betrayed their distraction of panic. This was
still more strangely evinced by those of their number, who, completely
paralysed as it were, helplessly floated like water-logged dismantled
ships on the sea. Had these Leviathans been but a flock of simple
sheep, pursued over the pasture by three fierce wolves, they could not
possibly have evinced such excessive dismay. But this occasional
timidity is characteristic of almost all herding creatures. Though
banding together in tens of thousands, the lion-maned buffaloes of the
West have fled before a solitary horseman. Witness, too, all human
beings, how when herded together in the sheepfold of a theatre’s pit,
they will, at the slightest alarm of fire, rush helter-skelter for the
outlets, crowding, trampling, jamming, and remorselessly dashing each
other to death. Best, therefore, withhold any amazement at the
strangely gallied whales before us, for there is no folly of the beasts
of the earth which is not infinitely outdone by the madness of men.

Though many of the whales, as has been said, were in violent motion,
yet it is to be observed that as a whole the herd neither advanced nor
retreated, but collectively remained in one place. As is customary in
those cases, the boats at once separated, each making for some one lone
whale on the outskirts of the shoal. In about three minutes’ time,
Queequeg’s harpoon was flung; the stricken fish darted blinding spray
in our faces, and then running away with us like light, steered
straight for the heart of the herd. Though such a movement on the part
of the whale struck under such circumstances, is in no wise
unprecedented; and indeed is almost always more or less anticipated;
yet does it present one of the more perilous vicissitudes of the
fishery. For as the swift monster drags you deeper and deeper into the
frantic shoal, you bid adieu to circumspect life and only exist in a
delirious throb.

As, blind and deaf, the whale plunged forward, as if by sheer power of
speed to rid himself of the iron leech that had fastened to him; as we
thus tore a white gash in the sea, on all sides menaced as we flew, by
the crazed creatures to and fro rushing about us; our beset boat was
like a ship mobbed by ice-isles in a tempest, and striving to steer
through their complicated channels and straits, knowing not at what
moment it may be locked in and crushed.

But not a bit daunted, Queequeg steered us manfully; now sheering off
from this monster directly across our route in advance; now edging away
from that, whose colossal flukes were suspended overhead, while all the
time, Starbuck stood up in the bows, lance in hand, pricking out of our
way whatever whales he could reach by short darts, for there was no
time to make long ones. Nor were the oarsmen quite idle, though their
wonted duty was now altogether dispensed with. They chiefly attended to
the shouting part of the business. “Out of the way, Commodore!” cried
one, to a great dromedary that of a sudden rose bodily to the surface,
and for an instant threatened to swamp us. “Hard down with your tail,
there!” cried a second to another, which, close to our gunwale, seemed
calmly cooling himself with his own fan-like extremity.

All whaleboats carry certain curious contrivances, originally invented
by the Nantucket Indians, called druggs. Two thick squares of wood of
equal size are stoutly clenched together, so that they cross each
other’s grain at right angles; a line of considerable length is then
attached to the middle of this block, and the other end of the line
being looped, it can in a moment be fastened to a harpoon. It is
chiefly among gallied whales that this drugg is used. For then, more
whales are close round you than you can possibly chase at one time. But
sperm whales are not every day encountered; while you may, then, you
must kill all you can. And if you cannot kill them all at once, you
must wing them, so that they can be afterwards killed at your leisure.
Hence it is, that at times like these the drugg, comes into
requisition. Our boat was furnished with three of them. The first and
second were successfully darted, and we saw the whales staggeringly
running off, fettered by the enormous sidelong resistance of the towing
drugg. They were cramped like malefactors with the chain and ball. But
upon flinging the third, in the act of tossing overboard the clumsy
wooden block, it caught under one of the seats of the boat, and in an
instant tore it out and carried it away, dropping the oarsman in the
boat’s bottom as the seat slid from under him. On both sides the sea
came in at the wounded planks, but we stuffed two or three drawers and
shirts in, and so stopped the leaks for the time.

It had been next to impossible to dart these drugged-harpoons, were it
not that as we advanced into the herd, our whale’s way greatly
diminished; moreover, that as we went still further and further from
the circumference of commotion, the direful disorders seemed waning. So
that when at last the jerking harpoon drew out, and the towing whale
sideways vanished; then, with the tapering force of his parting
momentum, we glided between two whales into the innermost heart of the
shoal, as if from some mountain torrent we had slid into a serene
valley lake. Here the storms in the roaring glens between the outermost
whales, were heard but not felt. In this central expanse the sea
presented that smooth satin-like surface, called a sleek, produced by
the subtle moisture thrown off by the whale in his more quiet moods.
Yes, we were now in that enchanted calm which they say lurks at the
heart of every commotion. And still in the distracted distance we
beheld the tumults of the outer concentric circles, and saw successive
pods of whales, eight or ten in each, swiftly going round and round,
like multiplied spans of horses in a ring; and so closely shoulder to
shoulder, that a Titanic circus-rider might easily have over-arched the
middle ones, and so have gone round on their backs. Owing to the
density of the crowd of reposing whales, more immediately surrounding
the embayed axis of the herd, no possible chance of escape was at
present afforded us. We must watch for a breach in the living wall that
hemmed us in; the wall that had only admitted us in order to shut us
up. Keeping at the centre of the lake, we were occasionally visited by
small tame cows and calves; the women and children of this routed host.

Now, inclusive of the occasional wide intervals between the revolving
outer circles, and inclusive of the spaces between the various pods in
any one of those circles, the entire area at this juncture, embraced by
the whole multitude, must have contained at least two or three square
miles. At any rate—though indeed such a test at such a time might be
deceptive—spoutings might be discovered from our low boat that seemed
playing up almost from the rim of the horizon. I mention this
circumstance, because, as if the cows and calves had been purposely
locked up in this innermost fold; and as if the wide extent of the herd
had hitherto prevented them from learning the precise cause of its
stopping; or, possibly, being so young, unsophisticated, and every way
innocent and inexperienced; however it may have been, these smaller
whales—now and then visiting our becalmed boat from the margin of the
lake—evinced a wondrous fearlessness and confidence, or else a still
becharmed panic which it was impossible not to marvel at. Like
household dogs they came snuffling round us, right up to our gunwales,
and touching them; till it almost seemed that some spell had suddenly
domesticated them. Queequeg patted their foreheads; Starbuck scratched
their backs with his lance; but fearful of the consequences, for the
time refrained from darting it.

But far beneath this wondrous world upon the surface, another and still
stranger world met our eyes as we gazed over the side. For, suspended
in those watery vaults, floated the forms of the nursing mothers of the
whales, and those that by their enormous girth seemed shortly to become
mothers. The lake, as I have hinted, was to a considerable depth
exceedingly transparent; and as human infants while suckling will
calmly and fixedly gaze away from the breast, as if leading two
different lives at the time; and while yet drawing mortal nourishment,
be still spiritually feasting upon some unearthly reminiscence;—even so
did the young of these whales seem looking up towards us, but not at
us, as if we were but a bit of Gulfweed in their new-born sight.
Floating on their sides, the mothers also seemed quietly eyeing us. One
of these little infants, that from certain queer tokens seemed hardly a
day old, might have measured some fourteen feet in length, and some six
feet in girth. He was a little frisky; though as yet his body seemed
scarce yet recovered from that irksome position it had so lately
occupied in the maternal reticule; where, tail to head, and all ready
for the final spring, the unborn whale lies bent like a Tartar’s bow.
The delicate side-fins, and the palms of his flukes, still freshly
retained the plaited crumpled appearance of a baby’s ears newly arrived
from foreign parts.

“Line! line!” cried Queequeg, looking over the gunwale; “him fast! him
fast!—Who line him! Who struck?—Two whale; one big, one little!”

“What ails ye, man?” cried Starbuck.

“Look-e here,” said Queequeg, pointing down.

As when the stricken whale, that from the tub has reeled out hundreds
of fathoms of rope; as, after deep sounding, he floats up again, and
shows the slackened curling line buoyantly rising and spiralling
towards the air; so now, Starbuck saw long coils of the umbilical cord
of Madame Leviathan, by which the young cub seemed still tethered to
its dam. Not seldom in the rapid vicissitudes of the chase, this
natural line, with the maternal end loose, becomes entangled with the
hempen one, so that the cub is thereby trapped. Some of the subtlest
secrets of the seas seemed divulged to us in this enchanted pond. We
saw young Leviathan amours in the deep.*

*The sperm whale, as with all other species of the Leviathan, but
unlike most other fish, breeds indifferently at all seasons; after a
gestation which may probably be set down at nine months, producing but
one at a time; though in some few known instances giving birth to an
Esau and Jacob:—a contingency provided for in suckling by two teats,
curiously situated, one on each side of the anus; but the breasts
themselves extend upwards from that. When by chance these precious
parts in a nursing whale are cut by the hunter’s lance, the mother’s
pouring milk and blood rivallingly discolour the sea for rods. The milk
is very sweet and rich; it has been tasted by man; it might do well
with strawberries. When overflowing with mutual esteem, the whales
salute _more hominum_.

And thus, though surrounded by circle upon circle of consternations and
affrights, did these inscrutable creatures at the centre freely and
fearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments; yea, serenely revelled
in dalliance and delight. But even so, amid the tornadoed Atlantic of
my being, do I myself still for ever centrally disport in mute calm;
and while ponderous planets of unwaning woe revolve round me, deep down
and deep inland there I still bathe me in eternal mildness of joy.

Meanwhile, as we thus lay entranced, the occasional sudden frantic
spectacles in the distance evinced the activity of the other boats,
still engaged in drugging the whales on the frontier of the host; or
possibly carrying on the war within the first circle, where abundance
of room and some convenient retreats were afforded them. But the sight
of the enraged drugged whales now and then blindly darting to and fro
across the circles, was nothing to what at last met our eyes. It is
sometimes the custom when fast to a whale more than commonly powerful
and alert, to seek to hamstring him, as it were, by sundering or
maiming his gigantic tail-tendon. It is done by darting a short-handled
cutting-spade, to which is attached a rope for hauling it back again. A
whale wounded (as we afterwards learned) in this part, but not
effectually, as it seemed, had broken away from the boat, carrying
along with him half of the harpoon line; and in the extraordinary agony
of the wound, he was now dashing among the revolving circles like the
lone mounted desperado Arnold, at the battle of Saratoga, carrying
dismay wherever he went.

But agonizing as was the wound of this whale, and an appalling
spectacle enough, any way; yet the peculiar horror with which he seemed
to inspire the rest of the herd, was owing to a cause which at first
the intervening distance obscured from us. But at length we perceived
that by one of the unimaginable accidents of the fishery, this whale
had become entangled in the harpoon-line that he towed; he had also run
away with the cutting-spade in him; and while the free end of the rope
attached to that weapon, had permanently caught in the coils of the
harpoon-line round his tail, the cutting-spade itself had worked loose
from his flesh. So that tormented to madness, he was now churning
through the water, violently flailing with his flexible tail, and
tossing the keen spade about him, wounding and murdering his own
comrades.

This terrific object seemed to recall the whole herd from their
stationary fright. First, the whales forming the margin of our lake
began to crowd a little, and tumble against each other, as if lifted by
half spent billows from afar; then the lake itself began faintly to
heave and swell; the submarine bridal-chambers and nurseries vanished;
in more and more contracting orbits the whales in the more central
circles began to swim in thickening clusters. Yes, the long calm was
departing. A low advancing hum was soon heard; and then like to the
tumultuous masses of block-ice when the great river Hudson breaks up in
Spring, the entire host of whales came tumbling upon their inner
centre, as if to pile themselves up in one common mountain. Instantly
Starbuck and Queequeg changed places; Starbuck taking the stern.

“Oars! Oars!” he intensely whispered, seizing the helm—“gripe your
oars, and clutch your souls, now! My God, men, stand by! Shove him off,
you Queequeg—the whale there!—prick him!—hit him! Stand up—stand up,
and stay so! Spring, men—pull, men; never mind their backs—scrape
them!—scrape away!”

The boat was now all but jammed between two vast black bulks, leaving a
narrow Dardanelles between their long lengths. But by desperate
endeavor we at last shot into a temporary opening; then giving way
rapidly, and at the same time earnestly watching for another outlet.
After many similar hair-breadth escapes, we at last swiftly glided into
what had just been one of the outer circles, but now crossed by random
whales, all violently making for one centre. This lucky salvation was
cheaply purchased by the loss of Queequeg’s hat, who, while standing in
the bows to prick the fugitive whales, had his hat taken clean from his
head by the air-eddy made by the sudden tossing of a pair of broad
flukes close by.

Riotous and disordered as the universal commotion now was, it soon
resolved itself into what seemed a systematic movement; for having
clumped together at last in one dense body, they then renewed their
onward flight with augmented fleetness. Further pursuit was useless;
but the boats still lingered in their wake to pick up what drugged
whales might be dropped astern, and likewise to secure one which Flask
had killed and waifed. The waif is a pennoned pole, two or three of
which are carried by every boat; and which, when additional game is at
hand, are inserted upright into the floating body of a dead whale, both
to mark its place on the sea, and also as token of prior possession,
should the boats of any other ship draw near.

The result of this lowering was somewhat illustrative of that sagacious
saying in the Fishery,—the more whales the less fish. Of all the
drugged whales only one was captured. The rest contrived to escape for
the time, but only to be taken, as will hereafter be seen, by some
other craft than the Pequod.


CHAPTER 88. Schools and Schoolmasters.

The previous chapter gave account of an immense body or herd of Sperm
Whales, and there was also then given the probable cause inducing those
vast aggregations.

Now, though such great bodies are at times encountered, yet, as must
have been seen, even at the present day, small detached bands are
occasionally observed, embracing from twenty to fifty individuals each.
Such bands are known as schools. They generally are of two sorts; those
composed almost entirely of females, and those mustering none but young
vigorous males, or bulls, as they are familiarly designated.

In cavalier attendance upon the school of females, you invariably see a
male of full grown magnitude, but not old; who, upon any alarm, evinces
his gallantry by falling in the rear and covering the flight of his
ladies. In truth, this gentleman is a luxurious Ottoman, swimming about
over the watery world, surroundingly accompanied by all the solaces and
endearments of the harem. The contrast between this Ottoman and his
concubines is striking; because, while he is always of the largest
leviathanic proportions, the ladies, even at full growth, are not more
than one-third of the bulk of an average-sized male. They are
comparatively delicate, indeed; I dare say, not to exceed half a dozen
yards round the waist. Nevertheless, it cannot be denied, that upon the
whole they are hereditarily entitled to _en bon point_.

It is very curious to watch this harem and its lord in their indolent
ramblings. Like fashionables, they are for ever on the move in
leisurely search of variety. You meet them on the Line in time for the
full flower of the Equatorial feeding season, having just returned,
perhaps, from spending the summer in the Northern seas, and so cheating
summer of all unpleasant weariness and warmth. By the time they have
lounged up and down the promenade of the Equator awhile, they start for
the Oriental waters in anticipation of the cool season there, and so
evade the other excessive temperature of the year.

When serenely advancing on one of these journeys, if any strange
suspicious sights are seen, my lord whale keeps a wary eye on his
interesting family. Should any unwarrantably pert young Leviathan
coming that way, presume to draw confidentially close to one of the
ladies, with what prodigious fury the Bashaw assails him, and chases
him away! High times, indeed, if unprincipled young rakes like him are
to be permitted to invade the sanctity of domestic bliss; though do
what the Bashaw will, he cannot keep the most notorious Lothario out of
his bed; for, alas! all fish bed in common. As ashore, the ladies often
cause the most terrible duels among their rival admirers; just so with
the whales, who sometimes come to deadly battle, and all for love. They
fence with their long lower jaws, sometimes locking them together, and
so striving for the supremacy like elks that warringly interweave their
antlers. Not a few are captured having the deep scars of these
encounters,—furrowed heads, broken teeth, scolloped fins; and in some
instances, wrenched and dislocated mouths.

But supposing the invader of domestic bliss to betake himself away at
the first rush of the harem’s lord, then is it very diverting to watch
that lord. Gently he insinuates his vast bulk among them again and
revels there awhile, still in tantalizing vicinity to young Lothario,
like pious Solomon devoutly worshipping among his thousand concubines.
Granting other whales to be in sight, the fishermen will seldom give
chase to one of these Grand Turks; for these Grand Turks are too lavish
of their strength, and hence their unctuousness is small. As for the
sons and the daughters they beget, why, those sons and daughters must
take care of themselves; at least, with only the maternal help. For
like certain other omnivorous roving lovers that might be named, my
Lord Whale has no taste for the nursery, however much for the bower;
and so, being a great traveller, he leaves his anonymous babies all
over the world; every baby an exotic. In good time, nevertheless, as
the ardour of youth declines; as years and dumps increase; as
reflection lends her solemn pauses; in short, as a general lassitude
overtakes the sated Turk; then a love of ease and virtue supplants the
love for maidens; our Ottoman enters upon the impotent, repentant,
admonitory stage of life, forswears, disbands the harem, and grown to
an exemplary, sulky old soul, goes about all alone among the meridians
and parallels saying his prayers, and warning each young Leviathan from
his amorous errors.

Now, as the harem of whales is called by the fishermen a school, so is
the lord and master of that school technically known as the
schoolmaster. It is therefore not in strict character, however
admirably satirical, that after going to school himself, he should then
go abroad inculcating not what he learned there, but the folly of it.
His title, schoolmaster, would very naturally seem derived from the
name bestowed upon the harem itself, but some have surmised that the
man who first thus entitled this sort of Ottoman whale, must have read
the memoirs of Vidocq, and informed himself what sort of a
country-schoolmaster that famous Frenchman was in his younger days, and
what was the nature of those occult lessons he inculcated into some of
his pupils.

The same secludedness and isolation to which the schoolmaster whale
betakes himself in his advancing years, is true of all aged Sperm
Whales. Almost universally, a lone whale—as a solitary Leviathan is
called—proves an ancient one. Like venerable moss-bearded Daniel Boone,
he will have no one near him but Nature herself; and her he takes to
wife in the wilderness of waters, and the best of wives she is, though
she keeps so many moody secrets.

The schools composing none but young and vigorous males, previously
mentioned, offer a strong contrast to the harem schools. For while
those female whales are characteristically timid, the young males, or
forty-barrel-bulls, as they call them, are by far the most pugnacious
of all Leviathans, and proverbially the most dangerous to encounter;
excepting those wondrous grey-headed, grizzled whales, sometimes met,
and these will fight you like grim fiends exasperated by a penal gout.

The Forty-barrel-bull schools are larger than the harem schools. Like a
mob of young collegians, they are full of fight, fun, and wickedness,
tumbling round the world at such a reckless, rollicking rate, that no
prudent underwriter would insure them any more than he would a riotous
lad at Yale or Harvard. They soon relinquish this turbulence though,
and when about three-fourths grown, break up, and separately go about
in quest of settlements, that is, harems.

Another point of difference between the male and female schools is
still more characteristic of the sexes. Say you strike a
Forty-barrel-bull—poor devil! all his comrades quit him. But strike a
member of the harem school, and her companions swim around her with
every token of concern, sometimes lingering so near her and so long, as
themselves to fall a prey.


CHAPTER 89. Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish.

The allusion to the waif and waif-poles in the last chapter but one,
necessitates some account of the laws and regulations of the whale
fishery, of which the waif may be deemed the grand symbol and badge.

It frequently happens that when several ships are cruising in company,
a whale may be struck by one vessel, then escape, and be finally killed
and captured by another vessel; and herein are indirectly comprised
many minor contingencies, all partaking of this one grand feature. For
example,—after a weary and perilous chase and capture of a whale, the
body may get loose from the ship by reason of a violent storm; and
drifting far away to leeward, be retaken by a second whaler, who, in a
calm, snugly tows it alongside, without risk of life or line. Thus the
most vexatious and violent disputes would often arise between the
fishermen, were there not some written or unwritten, universal,
undisputed law applicable to all cases.

Perhaps the only formal whaling code authorized by legislative
enactment, was that of Holland. It was decreed by the States-General in
A.D. 1695. But though no other nation has ever had any written whaling
law, yet the American fishermen have been their own legislators and
lawyers in this matter. They have provided a system which for terse
comprehensiveness surpasses Justinian’s Pandects and the By-laws of the
Chinese Society for the Suppression of Meddling with other People’s
Business. Yes; these laws might be engraven on a Queen Anne’s farthing,
or the barb of a harpoon, and worn round the neck, so small are they.

I. A Fast-Fish belongs to the party fast to it.

II. A Loose-Fish is fair game for anybody who can soonest catch it.

But what plays the mischief with this masterly code is the admirable
brevity of it, which necessitates a vast volume of commentaries to
expound it.

First: What is a Fast-Fish? Alive or dead a fish is technically fast,
when it is connected with an occupied ship or boat, by any medium at
all controllable by the occupant or occupants,—a mast, an oar, a
nine-inch cable, a telegraph wire, or a strand of cobweb, it is all the
same. Likewise a fish is technically fast when it bears a waif, or any
other recognised symbol of possession; so long as the party waifing it
plainly evince their ability at any time to take it alongside, as well
as their intention so to do.

These are scientific commentaries; but the commentaries of the whalemen
themselves sometimes consist in hard words and harder knocks—the
Coke-upon-Littleton of the fist. True, among the more upright and
honorable whalemen allowances are always made for peculiar cases, where
it would be an outrageous moral injustice for one party to claim
possession of a whale previously chased or killed by another party. But
others are by no means so scrupulous.

Some fifty years ago there was a curious case of whale-trover litigated
in England, wherein the plaintiffs set forth that after a hard chase of
a whale in the Northern seas; and when indeed they (the plaintiffs) had
succeeded in harpooning the fish; they were at last, through peril of
their lives, obliged to forsake not only their lines, but their boat
itself. Ultimately the defendants (the crew of another ship) came up
with the whale, struck, killed, seized, and finally appropriated it
before the very eyes of the plaintiffs. And when those defendants were
remonstrated with, their captain snapped his fingers in the plaintiffs’
teeth, and assured them that by way of doxology to the deed he had
done, he would now retain their line, harpoons, and boat, which had
remained attached to the whale at the time of the seizure. Wherefore
the plaintiffs now sued for the recovery of the value of their whale,
line, harpoons, and boat.

Mr. Erskine was counsel for the defendants; Lord Ellenborough was the
judge. In the course of the defence, the witty Erskine went on to
illustrate his position, by alluding to a recent crim. con. case,
wherein a gentleman, after in vain trying to bridle his wife’s
viciousness, had at last abandoned her upon the seas of life; but in
the course of years, repenting of that step, he instituted an action to
recover possession of her. Erskine was on the other side; and he then
supported it by saying, that though the gentleman had originally
harpooned the lady, and had once had her fast, and only by reason of
the great stress of her plunging viciousness, had at last abandoned
her; yet abandon her he did, so that she became a loose-fish; and
therefore when a subsequent gentleman re-harpooned her, the lady then
became that subsequent gentleman’s property, along with whatever
harpoon might have been found sticking in her.

Now in the present case Erskine contended that the examples of the
whale and the lady were reciprocally illustrative of each other.

These pleadings, and the counter pleadings, being duly heard, the very
learned judge in set terms decided, to wit,—That as for the boat, he
awarded it to the plaintiffs, because they had merely abandoned it to
save their lives; but that with regard to the controverted whale,
harpoons, and line, they belonged to the defendants; the whale, because
it was a Loose-Fish at the time of the final capture; and the harpoons
and line because when the fish made off with them, it (the fish)
acquired a property in those articles; and hence anybody who afterwards
took the fish had a right to them. Now the defendants afterwards took
the fish; ergo, the aforesaid articles were theirs.

A common man looking at this decision of the very learned Judge, might
possibly object to it. But ploughed up to the primary rock of the
matter, the two great principles laid down in the twin whaling laws
previously quoted, and applied and elucidated by Lord Ellenborough in
the above cited case; these two laws touching Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish,
I say, will, on reflection, be found the fundamentals of all human
jurisprudence; for notwithstanding its complicated tracery of
sculpture, the Temple of the Law, like the Temple of the Philistines,
has but two props to stand on.

Is it not a saying in every one’s mouth, Possession is half of the law:
that is, regardless of how the thing came into possession? But often
possession is the whole of the law. What are the sinews and souls of
Russian serfs and Republican slaves but Fast-Fish, whereof possession
is the whole of the law? What to the rapacious landlord is the widow’s
last mite but a Fast-Fish? What is yonder undetected villain’s marble
mansion with a door-plate for a waif; what is that but a Fast-Fish?
What is the ruinous discount which Mordecai, the broker, gets from poor
Woebegone, the bankrupt, on a loan to keep Woebegone’s family from
starvation; what is that ruinous discount but a Fast-Fish? What is the
Archbishop of Savesoul’s income of £100,000 seized from the scant bread
and cheese of hundreds of thousands of broken-backed laborers (all sure
of heaven without any of Savesoul’s help) what is that globular
£100,000 but a Fast-Fish? What are the Duke of Dunder’s hereditary
towns and hamlets but Fast-Fish? What to that redoubted harpooneer,
John Bull, is poor Ireland, but a Fast-Fish? What to that apostolic
lancer, Brother Jonathan, is Texas but a Fast-Fish? And concerning all
these, is not Possession the whole of the law?

But if the doctrine of Fast-Fish be pretty generally applicable, the
kindred doctrine of Loose-Fish is still more widely so. That is
internationally and universally applicable.

What was America in 1492 but a Loose-Fish, in which Columbus struck the
Spanish standard by way of waifing it for his royal master and
mistress? What was Poland to the Czar? What Greece to the Turk? What
India to England? What at last will Mexico be to the United States? All
Loose-Fish.

What are the Rights of Man and the Liberties of the World but
Loose-Fish? What all men’s minds and opinions but Loose-Fish? What is
the principle of religious belief in them but a Loose-Fish? What to the
ostentatious smuggling verbalists are the thoughts of thinkers but
Loose-Fish? What is the great globe itself but a Loose-Fish? And what
are you, reader, but a Loose-Fish and a Fast-Fish, too?


CHAPTER 90. Heads or Tails.

“De balena vero sufficit, si rex habeat caput, et regina caudam.”
_Bracton, l. 3, c. 3._

Latin from the books of the Laws of England, which taken along with the
context, means, that of all whales captured by anybody on the coast of
that land, the King, as Honorary Grand Harpooneer, must have the head,
and the Queen be respectfully presented with the tail. A division
which, in the whale, is much like halving an apple; there is no
intermediate remainder. Now as this law, under a modified form, is to
this day in force in England; and as it offers in various respects a
strange anomaly touching the general law of Fast and Loose-Fish, it is
here treated of in a separate chapter, on the same courteous principle
that prompts the English railways to be at the expense of a separate
car, specially reserved for the accommodation of royalty. In the first
place, in curious proof of the fact that the above-mentioned law is
still in force, I proceed to lay before you a circumstance that
happened within the last two years.

It seems that some honest mariners of Dover, or Sandwich, or some one
of the Cinque Ports, had after a hard chase succeeded in killing and
beaching a fine whale which they had originally descried afar off from
the shore. Now the Cinque Ports are partially or somehow under the
jurisdiction of a sort of policeman or beadle, called a Lord Warden.
Holding the office directly from the crown, I believe, all the royal
emoluments incident to the Cinque Port territories become by assignment
his. By some writers this office is called a sinecure. But not so.
Because the Lord Warden is busily employed at times in fobbing his
perquisites; which are his chiefly by virtue of that same fobbing of
them.

Now when these poor sun-burnt mariners, bare-footed, and with their
trowsers rolled high up on their eely legs, had wearily hauled their
fat fish high and dry, promising themselves a good £150 from the
precious oil and bone; and in fantasy sipping rare tea with their
wives, and good ale with their cronies, upon the strength of their
respective shares; up steps a very learned and most Christian and
charitable gentleman, with a copy of Blackstone under his arm; and
laying it upon the whale’s head, he says—“Hands off! this fish, my
masters, is a Fast-Fish. I seize it as the Lord Warden’s.” Upon this
the poor mariners in their respectful consternation—so truly
English—knowing not what to say, fall to vigorously scratching their
heads all round; meanwhile ruefully glancing from the whale to the
stranger. But that did in nowise mend the matter, or at all soften the
hard heart of the learned gentleman with the copy of Blackstone. At
length one of them, after long scratching about for his ideas, made
bold to speak,

“Please, sir, who is the Lord Warden?”

“The Duke.”

“But the duke had nothing to do with taking this fish?”

“It is his.”

“We have been at great trouble, and peril, and some expense, and is all
that to go to the Duke’s benefit; we getting nothing at all for our
pains but our blisters?”

“It is his.”

“Is the Duke so very poor as to be forced to this desperate mode of
getting a livelihood?”

“It is his.”

“I thought to relieve my old bed-ridden mother by part of my share of
this whale.”

“It is his.”

“Won’t the Duke be content with a quarter or a half?”

“It is his.”

In a word, the whale was seized and sold, and his Grace the Duke of
Wellington received the money. Thinking that viewed in some particular
lights, the case might by a bare possibility in some small degree be
deemed, under the circumstances, a rather hard one, an honest clergyman
of the town respectfully addressed a note to his Grace, begging him to
take the case of those unfortunate mariners into full consideration. To
which my Lord Duke in substance replied (both letters were published)
that he had already done so, and received the money, and would be
obliged to the reverend gentleman if for the future he (the reverend
gentleman) would decline meddling with other people’s business. Is this
the still militant old man, standing at the corners of the three
kingdoms, on all hands coercing alms of beggars?

It will readily be seen that in this case the alleged right of the Duke
to the whale was a delegated one from the Sovereign. We must needs
inquire then on what principle the Sovereign is originally invested
with that right. The law itself has already been set forth. But Plowdon
gives us the reason for it. Says Plowdon, the whale so caught belongs
to the King and Queen, “because of its superior excellence.” And by the
soundest commentators this has ever been held a cogent argument in such
matters.

But why should the King have the head, and the Queen the tail? A reason
for that, ye lawyers!

In his treatise on “Queen-Gold,” or Queen-pinmoney, an old King’s Bench
author, one William Prynne, thus discourseth: “Ye tail is ye Queen’s,
that ye Queen’s wardrobe may be supplied with ye whalebone.” Now this
was written at a time when the black limber bone of the Greenland or
Right whale was largely used in ladies’ bodices. But this same bone is
not in the tail; it is in the head, which is a sad mistake for a
sagacious lawyer like Prynne. But is the Queen a mermaid, to be
presented with a tail? An allegorical meaning may lurk here.

There are two royal fish so styled by the English law writers—the whale
and the sturgeon; both royal property under certain limitations, and
nominally supplying the tenth branch of the crown’s ordinary revenue. I
know not that any other author has hinted of the matter; but by
inference it seems to me that the sturgeon must be divided in the same
way as the whale, the King receiving the highly dense and elastic head
peculiar to that fish, which, symbolically regarded, may possibly be
humorously grounded upon some presumed congeniality. And thus there
seems a reason in all things, even in law.


CHAPTER 91. The Pequod Meets The Rose-Bud.

“In vain it was to rake for Ambergriese in the paunch of this
Leviathan, insufferable fetor denying not inquiry.” _Sir T. Browne,
V.E._

It was a week or two after the last whaling scene recounted, and when
we were slowly sailing over a sleepy, vapory, mid-day sea, that the
many noses on the Pequod’s deck proved more vigilant discoverers than
the three pairs of eyes aloft. A peculiar and not very pleasant smell
was smelt in the sea.

“I will bet something now,” said Stubb, “that somewhere hereabouts are
some of those drugged whales we tickled the other day. I thought they
would keel up before long.”

Presently, the vapors in advance slid aside; and there in the distance
lay a ship, whose furled sails betokened that some sort of whale must
be alongside. As we glided nearer, the stranger showed French colours
from his peak; and by the eddying cloud of vulture sea-fowl that
circled, and hovered, and swooped around him, it was plain that the
whale alongside must be what the fishermen call a blasted whale, that
is, a whale that has died unmolested on the sea, and so floated an
unappropriated corpse. It may well be conceived, what an unsavory odor
such a mass must exhale; worse than an Assyrian city in the plague,
when the living are incompetent to bury the departed. So intolerable
indeed is it regarded by some, that no cupidity could persuade them to
moor alongside of it. Yet are there those who will still do it;
notwithstanding the fact that the oil obtained from such subjects is of
a very inferior quality, and by no means of the nature of
attar-of-rose.

Coming still nearer with the expiring breeze, we saw that the Frenchman
had a second whale alongside; and this second whale seemed even more of
a nosegay than the first. In truth, it turned out to be one of those
problematical whales that seem to dry up and die with a sort of
prodigious dyspepsia, or indigestion; leaving their defunct bodies
almost entirely bankrupt of anything like oil. Nevertheless, in the
proper place we shall see that no knowing fisherman will ever turn up
his nose at such a whale as this, however much he may shun blasted
whales in general.

The Pequod had now swept so nigh to the stranger, that Stubb vowed he
recognised his cutting spade-pole entangled in the lines that were
knotted round the tail of one of these whales.

“There’s a pretty fellow, now,” he banteringly laughed, standing in the
ship’s bows, “there’s a jackal for ye! I well know that these Crappoes
of Frenchmen are but poor devils in the fishery; sometimes lowering
their boats for breakers, mistaking them for Sperm Whale spouts; yes,
and sometimes sailing from their port with their hold full of boxes of
tallow candles, and cases of snuffers, foreseeing that all the oil they
will get won’t be enough to dip the Captain’s wick into; aye, we all
know these things; but look ye, here’s a Crappo that is content with
our leavings, the drugged whale there, I mean; aye, and is content too
with scraping the dry bones of that other precious fish he has there.
Poor devil! I say, pass round a hat, some one, and let’s make him a
present of a little oil for dear charity’s sake. For what oil he’ll get
from that drugged whale there, wouldn’t be fit to burn in a jail; no,
not in a condemned cell. And as for the other whale, why, I’ll agree to
get more oil by chopping up and trying out these three masts of ours,
than he’ll get from that bundle of bones; though, now that I think of
it, it may contain something worth a good deal more than oil; yes,
ambergris. I wonder now if our old man has thought of that. It’s worth
trying. Yes, I’m for it;” and so saying he started for the
quarter-deck.

By this time the faint air had become a complete calm; so that whether
or no, the Pequod was now fairly entrapped in the smell, with no hope
of escaping except by its breezing up again. Issuing from the cabin,
Stubb now called his boat’s crew, and pulled off for the stranger.
Drawing across her bow, he perceived that in accordance with the
fanciful French taste, the upper part of her stem-piece was carved in
the likeness of a huge drooping stalk, was painted green, and for
thorns had copper spikes projecting from it here and there; the whole
terminating in a symmetrical folded bulb of a bright red colour. Upon
her head boards, in large gilt letters, he read “Bouton de
Rose,”—Rose-button, or Rose-bud; and this was the romantic name of this
aromatic ship.

Though Stubb did not understand the _Bouton_ part of the inscription,
yet the word _rose_, and the bulbous figure-head put together,
sufficiently explained the whole to him.

“A wooden rose-bud, eh?” he cried with his hand to his nose, “that will
do very well; but how like all creation it smells!”

Now in order to hold direct communication with the people on deck, he
had to pull round the bows to the starboard side, and thus come close
to the blasted whale; and so talk over it.

Arrived then at this spot, with one hand still to his nose, he
bawled—“Bouton-de-Rose, ahoy! are there any of you Bouton-de-Roses that
speak English?”

“Yes,” rejoined a Guernsey-man from the bulwarks, who turned out to be
the chief-mate.

“Well, then, my Bouton-de-Rose-bud, have you seen the White Whale?”

“_What_ whale?”

“The _White_ Whale—a Sperm Whale—Moby Dick, have ye seen him?

“Never heard of such a whale. Cachalot Blanche! White Whale—no.”

“Very good, then; good bye now, and I’ll call again in a minute.”

Then rapidly pulling back towards the Pequod, and seeing Ahab leaning
over the quarter-deck rail awaiting his report, he moulded his two
hands into a trumpet and shouted—“No, Sir! No!” Upon which Ahab
retired, and Stubb returned to the Frenchman.

He now perceived that the Guernsey-man, who had just got into the
chains, and was using a cutting-spade, had slung his nose in a sort of
bag.

“What’s the matter with your nose, there?” said Stubb. “Broke it?”

“I wish it was broken, or that I didn’t have any nose at all!” answered
the Guernsey-man, who did not seem to relish the job he was at very
much. “But what are you holding _yours_ for?”

“Oh, nothing! It’s a wax nose; I have to hold it on. Fine day, ain’t
it? Air rather gardenny, I should say; throw us a bunch of posies, will
ye, Bouton-de-Rose?”

“What in the devil’s name do you want here?” roared the Guernseyman,
flying into a sudden passion.

“Oh! keep cool—cool? yes, that’s the word! why don’t you pack those
whales in ice while you’re working at ’em? But joking aside, though; do
you know, Rose-bud, that it’s all nonsense trying to get any oil out of
such whales? As for that dried up one, there, he hasn’t a gill in his
whole carcase.”

“I know that well enough; but, d’ye see, the Captain here won’t believe
it; this is his first voyage; he was a Cologne manufacturer before. But
come aboard, and mayhap he’ll believe you, if he won’t me; and so I’ll
get out of this dirty scrape.”

“Anything to oblige ye, my sweet and pleasant fellow,” rejoined Stubb,
and with that he soon mounted to the deck. There a queer scene
presented itself. The sailors, in tasselled caps of red worsted, were
getting the heavy tackles in readiness for the whales. But they worked
rather slow and talked very fast, and seemed in anything but a good
humor. All their noses upwardly projected from their faces like so many
jib-booms. Now and then pairs of them would drop their work, and run up
to the mast-head to get some fresh air. Some thinking they would catch
the plague, dipped oakum in coal-tar, and at intervals held it to their
nostrils. Others having broken the stems of their pipes almost short
off at the bowl, were vigorously puffing tobacco-smoke, so that it
constantly filled their olfactories.

Stubb was struck by a shower of outcries and anathemas proceeding from
the Captain’s round-house abaft; and looking in that direction saw a
fiery face thrust from behind the door, which was held ajar from
within. This was the tormented surgeon, who, after in vain
remonstrating against the proceedings of the day, had betaken himself
to the Captain’s round-house (_cabinet_ he called it) to avoid the
pest; but still, could not help yelling out his entreaties and
indignations at times.

Marking all this, Stubb argued well for his scheme, and turning to the
Guernsey-man had a little chat with him, during which the stranger mate
expressed his detestation of his Captain as a conceited ignoramus, who
had brought them all into so unsavory and unprofitable a pickle.
Sounding him carefully, Stubb further perceived that the Guernsey-man
had not the slightest suspicion concerning the ambergris. He therefore
held his peace on that head, but otherwise was quite frank and
confidential with him, so that the two quickly concocted a little plan
for both circumventing and satirizing the Captain, without his at all
dreaming of distrusting their sincerity. According to this little plan
of theirs, the Guernsey-man, under cover of an interpreter’s office,
was to tell the Captain what he pleased, but as coming from Stubb; and
as for Stubb, he was to utter any nonsense that should come uppermost
in him during the interview.

By this time their destined victim appeared from his cabin. He was a
small and dark, but rather delicate looking man for a sea-captain, with
large whiskers and moustache, however; and wore a red cotton velvet
vest with watch-seals at his side. To this gentleman, Stubb was now
politely introduced by the Guernsey-man, who at once ostentatiously put
on the aspect of interpreting between them.

“What shall I say to him first?” said he.

“Why,” said Stubb, eyeing the velvet vest and the watch and seals, “you
may as well begin by telling him that he looks a sort of babyish to me,
though I don’t pretend to be a judge.”

“He says, Monsieur,” said the Guernsey-man, in French, turning to his
captain, “that only yesterday his ship spoke a vessel, whose captain
and chief-mate, with six sailors, had all died of a fever caught from a
blasted whale they had brought alongside.”

Upon this the captain started, and eagerly desired to know more.

“What now?” said the Guernsey-man to Stubb.

“Why, since he takes it so easy, tell him that now I have eyed him
carefully, I’m quite certain that he’s no more fit to command a
whale-ship than a St. Jago monkey. In fact, tell him from me he’s a
baboon.”

“He vows and declares, Monsieur, that the other whale, the dried one,
is far more deadly than the blasted one; in fine, Monsieur, he conjures
us, as we value our lives, to cut loose from these fish.”

Instantly the captain ran forward, and in a loud voice commanded his
crew to desist from hoisting the cutting-tackles, and at once cast
loose the cables and chains confining the whales to the ship.

“What now?” said the Guernsey-man, when the Captain had returned to
them.

“Why, let me see; yes, you may as well tell him now that—that—in fact,
tell him I’ve diddled him, and (aside to himself) perhaps somebody
else.”

“He says, Monsieur, that he’s very happy to have been of any service to
us.”

Hearing this, the captain vowed that they were the grateful parties
(meaning himself and mate) and concluded by inviting Stubb down into
his cabin to drink a bottle of Bordeaux.

“He wants you to take a glass of wine with him,” said the interpreter.

“Thank him heartily; but tell him it’s against my principles to drink
with the man I’ve diddled. In fact, tell him I must go.”

“He says, Monsieur, that his principles won’t admit of his drinking;
but that if Monsieur wants to live another day to drink, then Monsieur
had best drop all four boats, and pull the ship away from these whales,
for it’s so calm they won’t drift.”

By this time Stubb was over the side, and getting into his boat, hailed
the Guernsey-man to this effect,—that having a long tow-line in his
boat, he would do what he could to help them, by pulling out the
lighter whale of the two from the ship’s side. While the Frenchman’s
boats, then, were engaged in towing the ship one way, Stubb
benevolently towed away at his whale the other way, ostentatiously
slacking out a most unusually long tow-line.

Presently a breeze sprang up; Stubb feigned to cast off from the whale;
hoisting his boats, the Frenchman soon increased his distance, while
the Pequod slid in between him and Stubb’s whale. Whereupon Stubb
quickly pulled to the floating body, and hailing the Pequod to give
notice of his intentions, at once proceeded to reap the fruit of his
unrighteous cunning. Seizing his sharp boat-spade, he commenced an
excavation in the body, a little behind the side fin. You would almost
have thought he was digging a cellar there in the sea; and when at
length his spade struck against the gaunt ribs, it was like turning up
old Roman tiles and pottery buried in fat English loam. His boat’s crew
were all in high excitement, eagerly helping their chief, and looking
as anxious as gold-hunters.

And all the time numberless fowls were diving, and ducking, and
screaming, and yelling, and fighting around them. Stubb was beginning
to look disappointed, especially as the horrible nosegay increased,
when suddenly from out the very heart of this plague, there stole a
faint stream of perfume, which flowed through the tide of bad smells
without being absorbed by it, as one river will flow into and then
along with another, without at all blending with it for a time.

“I have it, I have it,” cried Stubb, with delight, striking something
in the subterranean regions, “a purse! a purse!”

Dropping his spade, he thrust both hands in, and drew out handfuls of
something that looked like ripe Windsor soap, or rich mottled old
cheese; very unctuous and savory withal. You might easily dent it with
your thumb; it is of a hue between yellow and ash colour. And this,
good friends, is ambergris, worth a gold guinea an ounce to any
druggist. Some six handfuls were obtained; but more was unavoidably
lost in the sea, and still more, perhaps, might have been secured were
it not for impatient Ahab’s loud command to Stubb to desist, and come
on board, else the ship would bid them good bye.


CHAPTER 92. Ambergris.

Now this ambergris is a very curious substance, and so important as an
article of commerce, that in 1791 a certain Nantucket-born Captain
Coffin was examined at the bar of the English House of Commons on that
subject. For at that time, and indeed until a comparatively late day,
the precise origin of ambergris remained, like amber itself, a problem
to the learned. Though the word ambergris is but the French compound
for grey amber, yet the two substances are quite distinct. For amber,
though at times found on the sea-coast, is also dug up in some far
inland soils, whereas ambergris is never found except upon the sea.
Besides, amber is a hard, transparent, brittle, odorless substance,
used for mouth-pieces to pipes, for beads and ornaments; but ambergris
is soft, waxy, and so highly fragrant and spicy, that it is largely
used in perfumery, in pastiles, precious candles, hair-powders, and
pomatum. The Turks use it in cooking, and also carry it to Mecca, for
the same purpose that frankincense is carried to St. Peter’s in Rome.
Some wine merchants drop a few grains into claret, to flavor it.

Who would think, then, that such fine ladies and gentlemen should
regale themselves with an essence found in the inglorious bowels of a
sick whale! Yet so it is. By some, ambergris is supposed to be the
cause, and by others the effect, of the dyspepsia in the whale. How to
cure such a dyspepsia it were hard to say, unless by administering
three or four boat loads of Brandreth’s pills, and then running out of
harm’s way, as laborers do in blasting rocks.

I have forgotten to say that there were found in this ambergris,
certain hard, round, bony plates, which at first Stubb thought might be
sailors’ trowsers buttons; but it afterwards turned out that they were
nothing more than pieces of small squid bones embalmed in that manner.

Now that the incorruption of this most fragrant ambergris should be
found in the heart of such decay; is this nothing? Bethink thee of that
saying of St. Paul in Corinthians, about corruption and incorruption;
how that we are sown in dishonor, but raised in glory. And likewise
call to mind that saying of Paracelsus about what it is that maketh the
best musk. Also forget not the strange fact that of all things of
ill-savor, Cologne-water, in its rudimental manufacturing stages, is
the worst.

I should like to conclude the chapter with the above appeal, but
cannot, owing to my anxiety to repel a charge often made against
whalemen, and which, in the estimation of some already biased minds,
might be considered as indirectly substantiated by what has been said
of the Frenchman’s two whales. Elsewhere in this volume the slanderous
aspersion has been disproved, that the vocation of whaling is
throughout a slatternly, untidy business. But there is another thing to
rebut. They hint that all whales always smell bad. Now how did this
odious stigma originate?

I opine, that it is plainly traceable to the first arrival of the
Greenland whaling ships in London, more than two centuries ago. Because
those whalemen did not then, and do not now, try out their oil at sea
as the Southern ships have always done; but cutting up the fresh
blubber in small bits, thrust it through the bung holes of large casks,
and carry it home in that manner; the shortness of the season in those
Icy Seas, and the sudden and violent storms to which they are exposed,
forbidding any other course. The consequence is, that upon breaking
into the hold, and unloading one of these whale cemeteries, in the
Greenland dock, a savor is given forth somewhat similar to that arising
from excavating an old city grave-yard, for the foundations of a
Lying-in Hospital.

I partly surmise also, that this wicked charge against whalers may be
likewise imputed to the existence on the coast of Greenland, in former
times, of a Dutch village called Schmerenburgh or Smeerenberg, which
latter name is the one used by the learned Fogo Von Slack, in his great
work on Smells, a text-book on that subject. As its name imports
(smeer, fat; berg, to put up), this village was founded in order to
afford a place for the blubber of the Dutch whale fleet to be tried
out, without being taken home to Holland for that purpose. It was a
collection of furnaces, fat-kettles, and oil sheds; and when the works
were in full operation certainly gave forth no very pleasant savor. But
all this is quite different with a South Sea Sperm Whaler; which in a
voyage of four years perhaps, after completely filling her hold with
oil, does not, perhaps, consume fifty days in the business of boiling
out; and in the state that it is casked, the oil is nearly scentless.
The truth is, that living or dead, if but decently treated, whales as a
species are by no means creatures of ill odor; nor can whalemen be
recognised, as the people of the middle ages affected to detect a Jew
in the company, by the nose. Nor indeed can the whale possibly be
otherwise than fragrant, when, as a general thing, he enjoys such high
health; taking abundance of exercise; always out of doors; though, it
is true, seldom in the open air. I say, that the motion of a Sperm
Whale’s flukes above water dispenses a perfume, as when a musk-scented
lady rustles her dress in a warm parlor. What then shall I liken the
Sperm Whale to for fragrance, considering his magnitude? Must it not be
to that famous elephant, with jewelled tusks, and redolent with myrrh,
which was led out of an Indian town to do honor to Alexander the Great?


CHAPTER 93. The Castaway.

It was but some few days after encountering the Frenchman, that a most
significant event befell the most insignificant of the Pequod’s crew;
an event most lamentable; and which ended in providing the sometimes
madly merry and predestinated craft with a living and ever accompanying
prophecy of whatever shattered sequel might prove her own.

Now, in the whale ship, it is not every one that goes in the boats.
Some few hands are reserved called ship-keepers, whose province it is
to work the vessel while the boats are pursuing the whale. As a general
thing, these ship-keepers are as hardy fellows as the men comprising
the boats’ crews. But if there happen to be an unduly slender, clumsy,
or timorous wight in the ship, that wight is certain to be made a
ship-keeper. It was so in the Pequod with the little negro Pippin by
nick-name, Pip by abbreviation. Poor Pip! ye have heard of him before;
ye must remember his tambourine on that dramatic midnight, so
gloomy-jolly.

In outer aspect, Pip and Dough-Boy made a match, like a black pony and
a white one, of equal developments, though of dissimilar colour, driven
in one eccentric span. But while hapless Dough-Boy was by nature dull
and torpid in his intellects, Pip, though over tender-hearted, was at
bottom very bright, with that pleasant, genial, jolly brightness
peculiar to his tribe; a tribe, which ever enjoy all holidays and
festivities with finer, freer relish than any other race. For blacks,
the year’s calendar should show naught but three hundred and sixty-five
Fourth of Julys and New Year’s Days. Nor smile so, while I write that
this little black was brilliant, for even blackness has its brilliancy;
behold yon lustrous ebony, panelled in king’s cabinets. But Pip loved
life, and all life’s peaceable securities; so that the panic-striking
business in which he had somehow unaccountably become entrapped, had
most sadly blurred his brightness; though, as ere long will be seen,
what was thus temporarily subdued in him, in the end was destined to be
luridly illumined by strange wild fires, that fictitiously showed him
off to ten times the natural lustre with which in his native Tolland
County in Connecticut, he had once enlivened many a fiddler’s frolic on
the green; and at melodious even-tide, with his gay ha-ha! had turned
the round horizon into one star-belled tambourine. So, though in the
clear air of day, suspended against a blue-veined neck, the
pure-watered diamond drop will healthful glow; yet, when the cunning
jeweller would show you the diamond in its most impressive lustre, he
lays it against a gloomy ground, and then lights it up, not by the sun,
but by some unnatural gases. Then come out those fiery effulgences,
infernally superb; then the evil-blazing diamond, once the divinest
symbol of the crystal skies, looks like some crown-jewel stolen from
the King of Hell. But let us to the story.

It came to pass, that in the ambergris affair Stubb’s after-oarsman
chanced so to sprain his hand, as for a time to become quite maimed;
and, temporarily, Pip was put into his place.

The first time Stubb lowered with him, Pip evinced much nervousness;
but happily, for that time, escaped close contact with the whale; and
therefore came off not altogether discreditably; though Stubb observing
him, took care, afterwards, to exhort him to cherish his courageousness
to the utmost, for he might often find it needful.

Now upon the second lowering, the boat paddled upon the whale; and as
the fish received the darted iron, it gave its customary rap, which
happened, in this instance, to be right under poor Pip’s seat. The
involuntary consternation of the moment caused him to leap, paddle in
hand, out of the boat; and in such a way, that part of the slack whale
line coming against his chest, he breasted it overboard with him, so as
to become entangled in it, when at last plumping into the water. That
instant the stricken whale started on a fierce run, the line swiftly
straightened; and presto! poor Pip came all foaming up to the chocks of
the boat, remorselessly dragged there by the line, which had taken
several turns around his chest and neck.

Tashtego stood in the bows. He was full of the fire of the hunt. He
hated Pip for a poltroon. Snatching the boat-knife from its sheath, he
suspended its sharp edge over the line, and turning towards Stubb,
exclaimed interrogatively, “Cut?” Meantime Pip’s blue, choked face
plainly looked, Do, for God’s sake! All passed in a flash. In less than
half a minute, this entire thing happened.

“Damn him, cut!” roared Stubb; and so the whale was lost and Pip was
saved.

So soon as he recovered himself, the poor little negro was assailed by
yells and execrations from the crew. Tranquilly permitting these
irregular cursings to evaporate, Stubb then in a plain, business-like,
but still half humorous manner, cursed Pip officially; and that done,
unofficially gave him much wholesome advice. The substance was, Never
jump from a boat, Pip, except—but all the rest was indefinite, as the
soundest advice ever is. Now, in general, _Stick to the boat_, is your
true motto in whaling; but cases will sometimes happen when _Leap from
the boat_, is still better. Moreover, as if perceiving at last that if
he should give undiluted conscientious advice to Pip, he would be
leaving him too wide a margin to jump in for the future; Stubb suddenly
dropped all advice, and concluded with a peremptory command, “Stick to
the boat, Pip, or by the Lord, I won’t pick you up if you jump; mind
that. We can’t afford to lose whales by the likes of you; a whale would
sell for thirty times what you would, Pip, in Alabama. Bear that in
mind, and don’t jump any more.” Hereby perhaps Stubb indirectly hinted,
that though man loved his fellow, yet man is a money-making animal,
which propensity too often interferes with his benevolence.

But we are all in the hands of the Gods; and Pip jumped again. It was
under very similar circumstances to the first performance; but this
time he did not breast out the line; and hence, when the whale started
to run, Pip was left behind on the sea, like a hurried traveller’s
trunk. Alas! Stubb was but too true to his word. It was a beautiful,
bounteous, blue day; the spangled sea calm and cool, and flatly
stretching away, all round, to the horizon, like gold-beater’s skin
hammered out to the extremest. Bobbing up and down in that sea, Pip’s
ebon head showed like a head of cloves. No boat-knife was lifted when
he fell so rapidly astern. Stubb’s inexorable back was turned upon him;
and the whale was winged. In three minutes, a whole mile of shoreless
ocean was between Pip and Stubb. Out from the centre of the sea, poor
Pip turned his crisp, curling, black head to the sun, another lonely
castaway, though the loftiest and the brightest.

Now, in calm weather, to swim in the open ocean is as easy to the
practised swimmer as to ride in a spring-carriage ashore. But the awful
lonesomeness is intolerable. The intense concentration of self in the
middle of such a heartless immensity, my God! who can tell it? Mark,
how when sailors in a dead calm bathe in the open sea—mark how closely
they hug their ship and only coast along her sides.

But had Stubb really abandoned the poor little negro to his fate? No;
he did not mean to, at least. Because there were two boats in his wake,
and he supposed, no doubt, that they would of course come up to Pip
very quickly, and pick him up; though, indeed, such considerations
towards oarsmen jeopardized through their own timidity, is not always
manifested by the hunters in all similar instances; and such instances
not unfrequently occur; almost invariably in the fishery, a coward, so
called, is marked with the same ruthless detestation peculiar to
military navies and armies.

But it so happened, that those boats, without seeing Pip, suddenly
spying whales close to them on one side, turned, and gave chase; and
Stubb’s boat was now so far away, and he and all his crew so intent
upon his fish, that Pip’s ringed horizon began to expand around him
miserably. By the merest chance the ship itself at last rescued him;
but from that hour the little negro went about the deck an idiot; such,
at least, they said he was. The sea had jeeringly kept his finite body
up, but drowned the infinite of his soul. Not drowned entirely, though.
Rather carried down alive to wondrous depths, where strange shapes of
the unwarped primal world glided to and fro before his passive eyes;
and the miser-merman, Wisdom, revealed his hoarded heaps; and among the
joyous, heartless, ever-juvenile eternities, Pip saw the multitudinous,
God-omnipresent, coral insects, that out of the firmament of waters
heaved the colossal orbs. He saw God’s foot upon the treadle of the
loom, and spoke it; and therefore his shipmates called him mad. So
man’s insanity is heaven’s sense; and wandering from all mortal reason,
man comes at last to that celestial thought, which, to reason, is
absurd and frantic; and weal or woe, feels then uncompromised,
indifferent as his God.

For the rest, blame not Stubb too hardly. The thing is common in that
fishery; and in the sequel of the narrative, it will then be seen what
like abandonment befell myself.


CHAPTER 94. A Squeeze of the Hand.

That whale of Stubb’s, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the
Pequod’s side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations
previously detailed, were regularly gone through, even to the baling of
the Heidelburgh Tun, or Case.

While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed in
dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm; and
when the proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully manipulated
ere going to the try-works, of which anon.

It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with
several others, I sat down before a large Constantine’s bath of it, I
found it strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about
in the liquid part. It was our business to squeeze these lumps back
into fluid. A sweet and unctuous duty! No wonder that in old times this
sperm was such a favourite cosmetic. Such a clearer! such a sweetener!
such a softener! such a delicious molifier! After having my hands in it
for only a few minutes, my fingers felt like eels, and began, as it
were, to serpentine and spiralise.

As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter
exertion at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under
indolent sail, and gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands
among those soft, gentle globules of infiltrated tissues, woven almost
within the hour; as they richly broke to my fingers, and discharged all
their opulence, like fully ripe grapes their wine; as I snuffed up that
uncontaminated aroma,—literally and truly, like the smell of spring
violets; I declare to you, that for the time I lived as in a musky
meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in that inexpressible
sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I almost began to credit
the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in
allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that bath, I felt divinely
free from all ill-will, or petulance, or malice, of any sort
whatsoever.

Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm
till I myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a
strange sort of insanity came over me; and I found myself unwittingly
squeezing my co-laborers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the
gentle globules. Such an abounding, affectionate, friendly, loving
feeling did this avocation beget; that at last I was continually
squeezing their hands, and looking up into their eyes sentimentally; as
much as to say,—Oh! my dear fellow beings, why should we longer cherish
any social acerbities, or know the slightest ill-humor or envy! Come;
let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us all squeeze ourselves into
each other; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very milk and
sperm of kindness.

Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever! For now, since
by many prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that in all
cases man must eventually lower, or at least shift, his conceit of
attainable felicity; not placing it anywhere in the intellect or the
fancy; but in the wife, the heart, the bed, the table, the saddle, the
fireside, the country; now that I have perceived all this, I am ready
to squeeze case eternally. In thoughts of the visions of the night, I
saw long rows of angels in paradise, each with his hands in a jar of
spermaceti.

Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things
akin to it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the
try-works.

First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the tapering
part of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his flukes. It
is tough with congealed tendons—a wad of muscle—but still contains some
oil. After being severed from the whale, the white-horse is first cut
into portable oblongs ere going to the mincer. They look much like
blocks of Berkshire marble.

Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the
whale’s flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber, and
often participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness. It is
a most refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold. As its name
imports, it is of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a bestreaked
snowy and golden ground, dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and
purple. It is plums of rubies, in pictures of citron. Spite of reason,
it is hard to keep yourself from eating it. I confess, that once I
stole behind the foremast to try it. It tasted something as I should
conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis le Gros might have
tasted, supposing him to have been killed the first day after the
venison season, and that particular venison season contemporary with an
unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne.

There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up in
the course of this business, but which I feel it to be very puzzling
adequately to describe. It is called slobgollion; an appellation
original with the whalemen, and even so is the nature of the substance.
It is an ineffably oozy, stringy affair, most frequently found in the
tubs of sperm, after a prolonged squeezing, and subsequent decanting. I
hold it to be the wondrously thin, ruptured membranes of the case,
coalescing.

Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen. It designates the
dark, glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the
Greenland or right whale, and much of which covers the decks of those
inferior souls who hunt that ignoble Leviathan.

Nippers. Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale’s
vocabulary. But as applied by whalemen, it becomes so. A whaleman’s
nipper is a short firm strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering
part of Leviathan’s tail: it averages an inch in thickness, and for the
rest, is about the size of the iron part of a hoe. Edgewise moved along
the oily deck, it operates like a leathern squilgee; and by nameless
blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it all impurities.

But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at
once to descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its
inmates. This place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for
the blanket-pieces, when stript and hoisted from the whale. When the
proper time arrives for cutting up its contents, this apartment is a
scene of terror to all tyros, especially by night. On one side, lit by
a dull lantern, a space has been left clear for the workmen. They
generally go in pairs,—a pike-and-gaffman and a spade-man. The
whaling-pike is similar to a frigate’s boarding-weapon of the same
name. The gaff is something like a boat-hook. With his gaff, the
gaffman hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it from
slipping, as the ship pitches and lurches about. Meanwhile, the
spade-man stands on the sheet itself, perpendicularly chopping it into
the portable horse-pieces. This spade is sharp as hone can make it; the
spademan’s feet are shoeless; the thing he stands on will sometimes
irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge. If he cuts off one of
his own toes, or one of his assistants’, would you be very much
astonished? Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men.


CHAPTER 95. The Cassock.

Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this
post-mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the
windlass, pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small
curiosity a very strange, enigmatical object, which you would have seen
there, lying along lengthwise in the lee scuppers. Not the wondrous
cistern in the whale’s huge head; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower
jaw; not the miracle of his symmetrical tail; none of these would so
surprise you, as half a glimpse of that unaccountable cone,—longer than
a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in diameter at the base, and
jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg. And an idol, indeed, it
is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was. Such an idol as that
found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea; and for
worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her, and destroyed the
idol, and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron, as darkly
set forth in the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings.

Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and
assisted by two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the mariners
call it, and with bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as if he were a
grenadier carrying a dead comrade from the field. Extending it upon the
forecastle deck, he now proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt,
as an African hunter the pelt of a boa. This done he turns the pelt
inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives it a good stretching, so as
almost to double its diameter; and at last hangs it, well spread, in
the rigging, to dry. Ere long, it is taken down; when removing some
three feet of it, towards the pointed extremity, and then cutting two
slits for arm-holes at the other end, he lengthwise slips himself
bodily into it. The mincer now stands before you invested in the full
canonicals of his calling. Immemorial to all his order, this
investiture alone will adequately protect him, while employed in the
peculiar functions of his office.

That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the
pots; an operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse,
planted endwise against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub beneath
it, into which the minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets from a rapt
orator’s desk. Arrayed in decent black; occupying a conspicuous pulpit;
intent on bible leaves; what a candidate for an archbishopric, what a
lad for a Pope were this mincer!*

*Bible leaves! Bible leaves! This is the invariable cry from the mates
to the mincer. It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work into as
thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business of
boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity considerably
increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.


CHAPTER 96. The Try-Works.

Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly
distinguished by her try-works. She presents the curious anomaly of the
most solid masonry joining with oak and hemp in constituting the
completed ship. It is as if from the open field a brick-kiln were
transported to her planks.

The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the most
roomy part of the deck. The timbers beneath are of a peculiar strength,
fitted to sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of brick and
mortar, some ten feet by eight square, and five in height. The
foundation does not penetrate the deck, but the masonry is firmly
secured to the surface by ponderous knees of iron bracing it on all
sides, and screwing it down to the timbers. On the flanks it is cased
with wood, and at top completely covered by a large, sloping, battened
hatchway. Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots, two in
number, and each of several barrels’ capacity. When not in use, they
are kept remarkably clean. Sometimes they are polished with soapstone
and sand, till they shine within like silver punch-bowls. During the
night-watches some cynical old sailors will crawl into them and coil
themselves away there for a nap. While employed in polishing them—one
man in each pot, side by side—many confidential communications are
carried on, over the iron lips. It is a place also for profound
mathematical meditation. It was in the left hand try-pot of the Pequod,
with the soapstone diligently circling round me, that I was first
indirectly struck by the remarkable fact, that in geometry all bodies
gliding along the cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from
any point in precisely the same time.

Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare
masonry of that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of
the furnaces, directly underneath the pots. These mouths are fitted
with heavy doors of iron. The intense heat of the fire is prevented
from communicating itself to the deck, by means of a shallow reservoir
extending under the entire inclosed surface of the works. By a tunnel
inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept replenished with water as
fast as it evaporates. There are no external chimneys; they open direct
from the rear wall. And here let us go back for a moment.

It was about nine o’clock at night that the Pequod’s try-works were
first started on this present voyage. It belonged to Stubb to oversee
the business.

“All ready there? Off hatch, then, and start her. You cook, fire the
works.” This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been thrusting
his shavings into the furnace throughout the passage. Here be it said
that in a whaling voyage the first fire in the try-works has to be fed
for a time with wood. After that no wood is used, except as a means of
quick ignition to the staple fuel. In a word, after being tried out,
the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps or fritters, still
contains considerable of its unctuous properties. These fritters feed
the flames. Like a plethoric burning martyr, or a self-consuming
misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his own fuel and burns by
his own body. Would that he consumed his own smoke! for his smoke is
horrible to inhale, and inhale it you must, and not only that, but you
must live in it for the time. It has an unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor
about it, such as may lurk in the vicinity of funereal pyres. It smells
like the left wing of the day of judgment; it is an argument for the
pit.

By midnight the works were in full operation. We were clear from the
carcase; sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean
darkness was intense. But that darkness was licked up by the fierce
flames, which at intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and
illuminated every lofty rope in the rigging, as with the famed Greek
fire. The burning ship drove on, as if remorselessly commissioned to
some vengeful deed. So the pitch and sulphur-freighted brigs of the
bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight harbors, with broad
sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish frigates, and
folded them in conflagrations.

The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide
hearth in front of them. Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes of
the pagan harpooneers, always the whale-ship’s stokers. With huge
pronged poles they pitched hissing masses of blubber into the scalding
pots, or stirred up the fires beneath, till the snaky flames darted,
curling, out of the doors to catch them by the feet. The smoke rolled
away in sullen heaps. To every pitch of the ship there was a pitch of
the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness to leap into their faces.
Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further side of the wide wooden
hearth, was the windlass. This served for a sea-sofa. Here lounged the
watch, when not otherwise employed, looking into the red heat of the
fire, till their eyes felt scorched in their heads. Their tawny
features, now all begrimed with smoke and sweat, their matted beards,
and the contrasting barbaric brilliancy of their teeth, all these were
strangely revealed in the capricious emblazonings of the works. As they
narrated to each other their unholy adventures, their tales of terror
told in words of mirth; as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards
out of them, like the flames from the furnace; as to and fro, in their
front, the harpooneers wildly gesticulated with their huge pronged
forks and dippers; as the wind howled on, and the sea leaped, and the
ship groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot her red hell further
and further into the blackness of the sea and the night, and scornfully
champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round her on
all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of
darkness, seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac commander’s
soul.

So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours silently
guided the way of this fire-ship on the sea. Wrapped, for that
interval, in darkness myself, I but the better saw the redness, the
madness, the ghastliness of others. The continual sight of the fiend
shapes before me, capering half in smoke and half in fire, these at
last begat kindred visions in my soul, so soon as I began to yield to
that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would come over me at a
midnight helm.

But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since inexplicable)
thing occurred to me. Starting from a brief standing sleep, I was
horribly conscious of something fatally wrong. The jaw-bone tiller
smote my side, which leaned against it; in my ears was the low hum of
sails, just beginning to shake in the wind; I thought my eyes were
open; I was half conscious of putting my fingers to the lids and
mechanically stretching them still further apart. But, spite of all
this, I could see no compass before me to steer by; though it seemed
but a minute since I had been watching the card, by the steady binnacle
lamp illuminating it. Nothing seemed before me but a jet gloom, now and
then made ghastly by flashes of redness. Uppermost was the impression,
that whatever swift, rushing thing I stood on was not so much bound to
any haven ahead as rushing from all havens astern. A stark, bewildered
feeling, as of death, came over me. Convulsively my hands grasped the
tiller, but with the crazy conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in
some enchanted way, inverted. My God! what is the matter with me?
thought I. Lo! in my brief sleep I had turned myself about, and was
fronting the ship’s stern, with my back to her prow and the compass. In
an instant I faced back, just in time to prevent the vessel from flying
up into the wind, and very probably capsizing her. How glad and how
grateful the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night, and
the fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!

Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man! Never dream with thy
hand on the helm! Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the first
hint of the hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire, when its
redness makes all things look ghastly. To-morrow, in the natural sun,
the skies will be bright; those who glared like devils in the forking
flames, the morn will show in far other, at least gentler, relief; the
glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true lamp—all others but liars!

Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia’s Dismal Swamp, nor Rome’s
accursed Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of
deserts and of griefs beneath the moon. The sun hides not the ocean,
which is the dark side of this earth, and which is two thirds of this
earth. So, therefore, that mortal man who hath more of joy than sorrow
in him, that mortal man cannot be true—not true, or undeveloped. With
books the same. The truest of all men was the Man of Sorrows, and the
truest of all books is Solomon’s, and Ecclesiastes is the fine hammered
steel of woe. “All is vanity.” ALL. This wilful world hath not got hold
of unchristian Solomon’s wisdom yet. But he who dodges hospitals and
jails, and walks fast crossing graveyards, and would rather talk of
operas than hell; calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils
all of sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais
as passing wise, and therefore jolly;—not that man is fitted to sit
down on tomb-stones, and break the green damp mould with unfathomably
wondrous Solomon.

But even Solomon, he says, “the man that wandereth out of the way of
understanding shall remain” (_i.e._, even while living) “in the
congregation of the dead.” Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest it
invert thee, deaden thee; as for the time it did me. There is a wisdom
that is woe; but there is a woe that is madness. And there is a
Catskill eagle in some souls that can alike dive down into the blackest
gorges, and soar out of them again and become invisible in the sunny
spaces. And even if he for ever flies within the gorge, that gorge is
in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the mountain eagle
is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even though they soar.


CHAPTER 97. The Lamp.

Had you descended from the Pequod’s try-works to the Pequod’s
forecastle, where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single
moment you would have almost thought you were standing in some
illuminated shrine of canonized kings and counsellors. There they lay
in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner a chiselled muteness; a
score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.

In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of
queens. To dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in
darkness to his pallet, this is his usual lot. But the whaleman, as he
seeks the food of light, so he lives in light. He makes his berth an
Aladdin’s lamp, and lays him down in it; so that in the pitchiest night
the ship’s black hull still houses an illumination.

See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of
lamps—often but old bottles and vials, though—to the copper cooler at
the try-works, and replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a vat. He
burns, too, the purest of oil, in its unmanufactured, and, therefore,
unvitiated state; a fluid unknown to solar, lunar, or astral
contrivances ashore. It is sweet as early grass butter in April. He
goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its freshness and
genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts up his own
supper of game.


CHAPTER 98. Stowing Down and Clearing Up.

Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off
descried from the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors,
and slaughtered in the valleys of the deep; how he is then towed
alongside and beheaded; and how (on the principle which entitled the
headsman of old to the garments in which the beheaded was killed) his
great padded surtout becomes the property of his executioner; how, in
due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed through the
fire;—but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this part of
the description by rehearsing—singing, if I may—the romantic proceeding
of decanting off his oil into the casks and striking them down into the
hold, where once again leviathan returns to his native profundities,
sliding along beneath the surface as before; but, alas! never more to
rise and blow.

While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the
six-barrel casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and rolling
this way and that in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are slewed
round and headed over, end for end, and sometimes perilously scoot
across the slippery deck, like so many land slides, till at last
man-handled and stayed in their course; and all round the hoops, rap,
rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now, _ex officio_,
every sailor is a cooper.

At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the
great hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open,
and down go the casks to their final rest in the sea. This done, the
hatches are replaced, and hermetically closed, like a closet walled up.

In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable
incidents in all the business of whaling. One day the planks stream
with freshets of blood and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous
masses of the whale’s head are profanely piled; great rusty casks lie
about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke from the try-works has besooted
all the bulwarks; the mariners go about suffused with unctuousness; the
entire ship seems great leviathan himself; while on all hands the din
is deafening.

But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in this
self-same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and try-works,
you would all but swear you trod some silent merchant vessel, with a
most scrupulously neat commander. The unmanufactured sperm oil
possesses a singularly cleansing virtue. This is the reason why the
decks never look so white as just after what they call an affair of
oil. Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps of the whale, a
potent lye is readily made; and whenever any adhesiveness from the back
of the whale remains clinging to the side, that lye quickly
exterminates it. Hands go diligently along the bulwarks, and with
buckets of water and rags restore them to their full tidiness. The soot
is brushed from the lower rigging. All the numerous implements which
have been in use are likewise faithfully cleansed and put away. The
great hatch is scrubbed and placed upon the try-works, completely
hiding the pots; every cask is out of sight; all tackles are coiled in
unseen nooks; and when by the combined and simultaneous industry of
almost the entire ship’s company, the whole of this conscientious duty
is at last concluded, then the crew themselves proceed to their own
ablutions; shift themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to the
immaculate deck, fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from
out the daintiest Holland.

Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and
humorously discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics;
propose to mat the deck; think of having hanging to the top; object not
to taking tea by moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle. To hint to
such musked mariners of oil, and bone, and blubber, were little short
of audacity. They know not the thing you distantly allude to. Away, and
bring us napkins!

But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men intent
on spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will again soil
the old oaken furniture, and drop at least one small grease-spot
somewhere. Yes; and many is the time, when, after the severest
uninterrupted labors, which know no night; continuing straight through
for ninety-six hours; when from the boat, where they have swelled their
wrists with all day rowing on the Line,—they only step to the deck to
carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass, and cut and slash,
yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and burned anew by the
combined fires of the equatorial sun and the equatorial try-works;
when, on the heel of all this, they have finally bestirred themselves
to cleanse the ship, and make a spotless dairy room of it; many is the
time the poor fellows, just buttoning the necks of their clean frocks,
are startled by the cry of “There she blows!” and away they fly to
fight another whale, and go through the whole weary thing again. Oh! my
friends, but this is man-killing! Yet this is life. For hardly have we
mortals by long toilings extracted from this world’s vast bulk its
small but valuable sperm; and then, with weary patience, cleansed
ourselves from its defilements, and learned to live here in clean
tabernacles of the soul; hardly is this done, when—_There she
blows!_—the ghost is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other
world, and go through young life’s old routine again.

Oh! the metempsychosis! Oh! Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two
thousand years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with
thee along the Peruvian coast last voyage—and, foolish as I am, taught
thee, a green simple boy, how to splice a rope!


CHAPTER 99. The Doubloon.

Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his quarter-deck,
taking regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and mainmast; but in
the multiplicity of other things requiring narration it has not been
added how that sometimes in these walks, when most plunged in his mood,
he was wont to pause in turn at each spot, and stand there strangely
eyeing the particular object before him. When he halted before the
binnacle, with his glance fastened on the pointed needle in the
compass, that glance shot like a javelin with the pointed intensity of
his purpose; and when resuming his walk he again paused before the
mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance fastened upon the riveted
gold coin there, he still wore the same aspect of nailed firmness, only
dashed with a certain wild longing, if not hopefulness.

But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly
attracted by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as
though now for the first time beginning to interpret for himself in
some monomaniac way whatever significance might lurk in them. And some
certain significance lurks in all things, else all things are little
worth, and the round world itself but an empty cipher, except to sell
by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston, to fill up some morass
in the Milky Way.

Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of
the heart of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden sands,
the head-waters of many a Pactolus flows. And though now nailed amidst
all the rustiness of iron bolts and the verdigris of copper spikes,
yet, untouchable and immaculate to any foulness, it still preserved its
Quito glow. Nor, though placed amongst a ruthless crew and every hour
passed by ruthless hands, and through the livelong nights shrouded with
thick darkness which might cover any pilfering approach, nevertheless
every sunrise found the doubloon where the sunset left it last. For it
was set apart and sanctified to one awe-striking end; and however
wanton in their sailor ways, one and all, the mariners revered it as
the white whale’s talisman. Sometimes they talked it over in the weary
watch by night, wondering whose it was to be at last, and whether he
would ever live to spend it.

Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the sun
and tropic token-pieces. Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes; sun’s
disks and stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners waving,
are in luxuriant profusion stamped; so that the precious gold seems
almost to derive an added preciousness and enhancing glories, by
passing through those fancy mints, so Spanishly poetic.

It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy
example of these things. On its round border it bore the letters,
REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR: QUITO. So this bright coin came from a country
planted in the middle of the world, and beneath the great equator, and
named after it; and it had been cast midway up the Andes, in the
unwaning clime that knows no autumn. Zoned by those letters you saw the
likeness of three Andes’ summits; from one a flame; a tower on another;
on the third a crowing cock; while arching over all was a segment of
the partitioned zodiac, the signs all marked with their usual
cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering the equinoctial point at
Libra.

Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now
pausing.

“There’s something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and
all other grand and lofty things; look here,—three peaks as proud as
Lucifer. The firm tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab; the
courageous, the undaunted, and victorious fowl, that, too, is Ahab; all
are Ahab; and this round gold is but the image of the rounder globe,
which, like a magician’s glass, to each and every man in turn but
mirrors back his own mysterious self. Great pains, small gains for
those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve itself. Methinks
now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see! aye, he enters the
sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months before he wheeled out
of a former equinox at Aries! From storm to storm! So be it, then. Born
in throes, ’tis fit that man should live in pains and die in pangs! So
be it, then! Here’s stout stuff for woe to work on. So be it, then.”

“No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil’s claws must
have left their mouldings there since yesterday,” murmured Starbuck to
himself, leaning against the bulwarks. “The old man seems to read
Belshazzar’s awful writing. I have never marked the coin inspectingly.
He goes below; let me read. A dark valley between three mighty,
heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the Trinity, in some faint
earthly symbol. So in this vale of Death, God girds us round; and over
all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines a beacon and a
hope. If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows her mouldy soil;
but if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance half way, to
cheer. Yet, oh, the great sun is no fixture; and if, at midnight, we
would fain snatch some sweet solace from him, we gaze for him in vain!
This coin speaks wisely, mildly, truly, but still sadly to me. I will
quit it, lest Truth shake me falsely.”

“There now’s the old Mogul,” soliloquized Stubb by the try-works, “he’s
been twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and both with
faces which I should say might be somewhere within nine fathoms long.
And all from looking at a piece of gold, which did I have it now on
Negro Hill or in Corlaer’s Hook, I’d not look at it very long ere
spending it. Humph! in my poor, insignificant opinion, I regard this as
queer. I have seen doubloons before now in my voyagings; your doubloons
of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your doubloons of Chili, your
doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of Popayan; with plenty of gold
moidores and pistoles, and joes, and half joes, and quarter joes. What
then should there be in this doubloon of the Equator that is so killing
wonderful? By Golconda! let me read it once. Halloa! here’s signs and
wonders truly! That, now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the
zodiac, and what my almanac below calls ditto. I’ll get the almanac and
as I have heard devils can be raised with Daboll’s arithmetic, I’ll try
my hand at raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the
Massachusetts calendar. Here’s the book. Let’s see now. Signs and
wonders; and the sun, he’s always among ’em. Hem, hem, hem; here they
are—here they go—all alive:—Aries, or the Ram; Taurus, or the Bull and
Jimimi! here’s Gemini himself, or the Twins. Well; the sun he wheels
among ’em. Aye, here on the coin he’s just crossing the threshold
between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring. Book! you lie there;
the fact is, you books must know your places. You’ll do to give us the
bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the thoughts. That’s my
small experience, so far as the Massachusetts calendar, and Bowditch’s
navigator, and Daboll’s arithmetic go. Signs and wonders, eh? Pity if
there is nothing wonderful in signs, and significant in wonders!
There’s a clue somewhere; wait a bit; hist—hark! By Jove, I have it!
Look you, Doubloon, your zodiac here is the life of man in one round
chapter; and now I’ll read it off, straight out of the book. Come,
Almanack! To begin: there’s Aries, or the Ram—lecherous dog, he begets
us; then, Taurus, or the Bull—he bumps us the first thing; then Gemini,
or the Twins—that is, Virtue and Vice; we try to reach Virtue, when lo!
comes Cancer the Crab, and drags us back; and here, going from Virtue,
Leo, a roaring Lion, lies in the path—he gives a few fierce bites and
surly dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin! that’s
our first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Libra, or the Scales—happiness weighed and found wanting; and while we
are very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio, or the
Scorpion, stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when whang
come the arrows all round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is amusing
himself. As we pluck out the shafts, stand aside! here’s the
battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full tilt, he comes rushing,
and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the Water-bearer, pours
out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind up with Pisces, or the
Fishes, we sleep. There’s a sermon now, writ in high heaven, and the
sun goes through it every year, and yet comes out of it all alive and
hearty. Jollily he, aloft there, wheels through toil and trouble; and
so, alow here, does jolly Stubb. Oh, jolly’s the word for aye! Adieu,
Doubloon! But stop; here comes little King-Post; dodge round the
try-works, now, and let’s hear what he’ll have to say. There; he’s
before it; he’ll out with something presently. So, so; he’s beginning.”

“I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever raises
a certain whale, this round thing belongs to him. So, what’s all this
staring been about? It is worth sixteen dollars, that’s true; and at
two cents the cigar, that’s nine hundred and sixty cigars. I won’t
smoke dirty pipes like Stubb, but I like cigars, and here’s nine
hundred and sixty of them; so here goes Flask aloft to spy ’em out.”

“Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has a
foolish look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a sort of
wiseish look to it. But, avast; here comes our old Manxman—the old
hearse-driver, he must have been, that is, before he took to the sea.
He luffs up before the doubloon; halloa, and goes round on the other
side of the mast; why, there’s a horse-shoe nailed on that side; and
now he’s back again; what does that mean? Hark! he’s muttering—voice
like an old worn-out coffee-mill. Prick ears, and listen!”

“If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when
the sun stands in some one of these signs. I’ve studied signs, and know
their marks; they were taught me two score years ago, by the old witch
in Copenhagen. Now, in what sign will the sun then be? The horse-shoe
sign; for there it is, right opposite the gold. And what’s the
horse-shoe sign? The lion is the horse-shoe sign—the roaring and
devouring lion. Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to think of thee.”

“There’s another rendering now; but still one text. All sorts of men in
one kind of world, you see. Dodge again! here comes Queequeg—all
tattooing—looks like the signs of the Zodiac himself. What says the
Cannibal? As I live he’s comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone;
thinks the sun is in the thigh, or in the calf, or in the bowels, I
suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon’s Astronomy in the back country.
And by Jove, he’s found something there in the vicinity of his thigh—I
guess it’s Sagittarius, or the Archer. No: he don’t know what to make
of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off some king’s
trowsers. But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil, Fedallah; tail
coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual.
What does he say, with that look of his? Ah, only makes a sign to the
sign and bows himself; there is a sun on the coin—fire worshipper,
depend upon it. Ho! more and more. This way comes Pip—poor boy! would
he had died, or I; he’s half horrible to me. He too has been watching
all of these interpreters—myself included—and look now, he comes to
read, with that unearthly idiot face. Stand away again and hear him.
Hark!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Upon my soul, he’s been studying Murray’s Grammar! Improving his mind,
poor fellow! But what’s that he says now—hist!”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Why, he’s getting it by heart—hist! again.”

“I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look.”

“Well, that’s funny.”

“And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I’m a
crow, especially when I stand a’top of this pine tree here. Caw! caw!
caw! caw! caw! caw! Ain’t I a crow? And where’s the scare-crow? There
he stands; two bones stuck into a pair of old trowsers, and two more
poked into the sleeves of an old jacket.”

“Wonder if he means me?—complimentary!—poor lad!—I could go hang
myself. Any way, for the present, I’ll quit Pip’s vicinity. I can stand
the rest, for they have plain wits; but he’s too crazy-witty for my
sanity. So, so, I leave him muttering.”

“Here’s the ship’s navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on fire
to unscrew it. But, unscrew your navel, and what’s the consequence?
Then again, if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for when aught’s
nailed to the mast it’s a sign that things grow desperate. Ha, ha! old
Ahab! the White Whale; he’ll nail ye! This is a pine tree. My father,
in old Tolland county, cut down a pine tree once, and found a silver
ring grown over in it; some old darkey’s wedding ring. How did it get
there? And so they’ll say in the resurrection, when they come to fish
up this old mast, and find a doubloon lodged in it, with bedded oysters
for the shaggy bark. Oh, the gold! the precious, precious, gold! the
green miser’ll hoard ye soon! Hish! hish! God goes ’mong the worlds
blackberrying. Cook! ho, cook! and cook us! Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey,
hey, Jenny, Jenny! and get your hoe-cake done!”


CHAPTER 100. Leg and Arm.

The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.

“Ship, ahoy! Hast seen the White Whale?”

So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours,
bearing down under the stern. Trumpet to mouth, the old man was
standing in his hoisted quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed to
the stranger captain, who was carelessly reclining in his own boat’s
bow. He was a darkly-tanned, burly, good-natured, fine-looking man, of
sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious roundabout, that hung round
him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and one empty arm of this jacket
streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a hussar’s surcoat.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“See you this?” and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it,
he held up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a wooden
head like a mallet.

“Man my boat!” cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars near
him—“Stand by to lower!”

In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his
crew were dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the
stranger. But here a curious difficulty presented itself. In the
excitement of the moment, Ahab had forgotten that since the loss of his
leg he had never once stepped on board of any vessel at sea but his
own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very handy mechanical
contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be rigged and
shipped in any other vessel at a moment’s warning. Now, it is no very
easy matter for anybody—except those who are almost hourly used to it,
like whalemen—to clamber up a ship’s side from a boat on the open sea;
for the great swells now lift the boat high up towards the bulwarks,
and then instantaneously drop it half way down to the kelson. So,
deprived of one leg, and the strange ship of course being altogether
unsupplied with the kindly invention, Ahab now found himself abjectly
reduced to a clumsy landsman again; hopelessly eyeing the uncertain
changeful height he could hardly hope to attain.

It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward
circumstance that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his
luckless mishap, almost invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab. And
in the present instance, all this was heightened by the sight of the
two officers of the strange ship, leaning over the side, by the
perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and swinging towards him a
pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first they did not seem
to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a cripple to
use their sea bannisters. But this awkwardness only lasted a minute,
because the strange captain, observing at a glance how affairs stood,
cried out, “I see, I see!—avast heaving there! Jump, boys, and swing
over the cutting-tackle.”

As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or two
previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive
curved blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the end.
This was quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it all,
slid his solitary thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like sitting
in the fluke of an anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree), and then
giving the word, held himself fast, and at the same time also helped to
hoist his own weight, by pulling hand-over-hand upon one of the running
parts of the tackle. Soon he was carefully swung inside the high
bulwarks, and gently landed upon the capstan head. With his ivory arm
frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other captain advanced, and Ahab,
putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory arm (like two
sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, “Aye, aye, hearty! let
us shake bones together!—an arm and a leg!—an arm that never can
shrink, d’ye see; and a leg that never can run. Where did’st thou see
the White Whale?—how long ago?”

“The White Whale,” said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm towards
the East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had been a
telescope; “there I saw him, on the Line, last season.”

“And he took that arm off, did he?” asked Ahab, now sliding down from
the capstan, and resting on the Englishman’s shoulder, as he did so.

“Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?”

“Spin me the yarn,” said Ahab; “how was it?”

“It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,”
began the Englishman. “I was ignorant of the White Whale at that time.
Well, one day we lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and my boat
fastened to one of them; a regular circus horse he was, too, that went
milling and milling round so, that my boat’s crew could only trim dish,
by sitting all their sterns on the outer gunwale. Presently up breaches
from the bottom of the sea a bouncing great whale, with a milky-white
head and hump, all crows’ feet and wrinkles.”

“It was he, it was he!” cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his suspended
breath.

“And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin.”

“Aye, aye—they were mine—_my_ irons,” cried Ahab, exultingly—“but on!”

“Give me a chance, then,” said the Englishman, good-humoredly. “Well,
this old great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs all
afoam into the pod, and goes to snapping furiously at my fast-line!

“Aye, I see!—wanted to part it; free the fast-fish—an old trick—I know
him.”

“How it was exactly,” continued the one-armed commander, “I do not
know; but in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there
somehow; but we didn’t know it then; so that when we afterwards pulled
on the line, bounce we came plump on to his hump! instead of the other
whale’s; that went off to windward, all fluking. Seeing how matters
stood, and what a noble great whale it was—the noblest and biggest I
ever saw, sir, in my life—I resolved to capture him, spite of the
boiling rage he seemed to be in. And thinking the hap-hazard line would
get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to might draw (for I have a
devil of a boat’s crew for a pull on a whale-line); seeing all this, I
say, I jumped into my first mate’s boat—Mr. Mounttop’s here (by the
way, Captain—Mounttop; Mounttop—the captain);—as I was saying, I jumped
into Mounttop’s boat, which, d’ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with
mine, then; and snatching the first harpoon, let this old
great-grandfather have it. But, Lord, look you, sir—hearts and souls
alive, man—the next instant, in a jiff, I was blind as a bat—both eyes
out—all befogged and bedeadened with black foam—the whale’s tail
looming straight up out of it, perpendicular in the air, like a marble
steeple. No use sterning all, then; but as I was groping at midday,
with a blinding sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after
the second iron, to toss it overboard—down comes the tail like a Lima
tower, cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and,
flukes first, the white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was
all chips. We all struck out. To escape his terrible flailings, I
seized hold of my harpoon-pole sticking in him, and for a moment clung
to that like a sucking fish. But a combing sea dashed me off, and at
the same instant, the fish, taking one good dart forwards, went down
like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron towing along near
me caught me here” (clapping his hand just below his shoulder); “yes,
caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to Hell’s flames, I was
thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the good God, the barb
ript its way along the flesh—clear along the whole length of my
arm—came out nigh my wrist, and up I floated;—and that gentleman there
will tell you the rest (by the way, captain—Dr. Bunger, ship’s surgeon:
Bunger, my lad,—the captain). Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the
yarn.”

The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all
the time standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote
his gentlemanly rank on board. His face was an exceedingly round but
sober one; he was dressed in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and
patched trowsers; and had thus far been dividing his attention between
a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a pill-box held in the other,
occasionally casting a critical glance at the ivory limbs of the two
crippled captains. But, at his superior’s introduction of him to Ahab,
he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his captain’s bidding.

“It was a shocking bad wound,” began the whale-surgeon; “and, taking my
advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy—”

“Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship,” interrupted the one-armed
captain, addressing Ahab; “go on, boy.”

“Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing
hot weather there on the Line. But it was no use—I did all I could; sat
up with him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of diet—”

“Oh, very severe!” chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly
altering his voice, “Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night, till
he couldn’t see to put on the bandages; and sending me to bed, half
seas over, about three o’clock in the morning. Oh, ye stars! he sat up
with me indeed, and was very severe in my diet. Oh! a great watcher,
and very dietetically severe, is Dr. Bunger. (Bunger, you dog, laugh
out! why don’t ye? You know you’re a precious jolly rascal.) But, heave
ahead, boy, I’d rather be killed by you than kept alive by any other
man.”

“My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir”—said the
imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab—“is apt to
be facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that sort. But
I may as well say—en passant, as the French remark—that I myself—that
is to say, Jack Bunger, late of the reverend clergy—am a strict total
abstinence man; I never drink—”

“Water!” cried the captain; “he never drinks it; it’s a sort of fits to
him; fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on—go on with
the arm story.”

“Yes, I may as well,” said the surgeon, coolly. “I was about observing,
sir, before Captain Boomer’s facetious interruption, that spite of my
best and severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse and worse;
the truth was, sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw;
more than two feet and several inches long. I measured it with the lead
line. In short, it grew black; I knew what was threatened, and off it
came. But I had no hand in shipping that ivory arm there; that thing is
against all rule”—pointing at it with the marlingspike—“that is the
captain’s work, not mine; he ordered the carpenter to make it; he had
that club-hammer there put to the end, to knock some one’s brains out
with, I suppose, as he tried mine once. He flies into diabolical
passions sometimes. Do ye see this dent, sir”—removing his hat, and
brushing aside his hair, and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull,
but which bore not the slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever
having been a wound—“Well, the captain there will tell you how that
came here; he knows.”

“No, I don’t,” said the captain, “but his mother did; he was born with
it. Oh, you solemn rogue, you—you Bunger! was there ever such another
Bunger in the watery world? Bunger, when you die, you ought to die in
pickle, you dog; you should be preserved to future ages, you rascal.”

“What became of the White Whale?” now cried Ahab, who thus far had been
impatiently listening to this by-play between the two Englishmen.

“Oh!” cried the one-armed captain, “oh, yes! Well; after he sounded, we
didn’t see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I
didn’t then know what whale it was that had served me such a trick,
till some time afterwards, when coming back to the Line, we heard about
Moby Dick—as some call him—and then I knew it was he.”

“Did’st thou cross his wake again?”

“Twice.”

“But could not fasten?”

“Didn’t want to try to: ain’t one limb enough? What should I do without
this other arm? And I’m thinking Moby Dick doesn’t bite so much as he
swallows.”

“Well, then,” interrupted Bunger, “give him your left arm for bait to
get the right. Do you know, gentlemen”—very gravely and mathematically
bowing to each Captain in succession—“Do you know, gentlemen, that the
digestive organs of the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine
Providence, that it is quite impossible for him to completely digest
even a man’s arm? And he knows it too. So that what you take for the
White Whale’s malice is only his awkwardness. For he never means to
swallow a single limb; he only thinks to terrify by feints. But
sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow, formerly a patient of
mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow jack-knives, once upon a
time let one drop into him in good earnest, and there it stayed for a
twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an emetic, and he heaved it up in
small tacks, d’ye see. No possible way for him to digest that
jack-knife, and fully incorporate it into his general bodily system.
Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are quick enough about it, and have a mind
to pawn one arm for the sake of the privilege of giving decent burial
to the other, why in that case the arm is yours; only let the whale
have another chance at you shortly, that’s all.”

“No, thank ye, Bunger,” said the English Captain, “he’s welcome to the
arm he has, since I can’t help it, and didn’t know him then; but not to
another one. No more White Whales for me; I’ve lowered for him once,
and that has satisfied me. There would be great glory in killing him, I
know that; and there is a ship-load of precious sperm in him, but, hark
ye, he’s best let alone; don’t you think so, Captain?”—glancing at the
ivory leg.

“He is. But he will still be hunted, for all that. What is best let
alone, that accursed thing is not always what least allures. He’s all a
magnet! How long since thou saw’st him last? Which way heading?”

“Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend’s,” cried Bunger, stoopingly
walking round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; “this man’s
blood—bring the thermometer!—it’s at the boiling point!—his pulse makes
these planks beat!—sir!”—taking a lancet from his pocket, and drawing
near to Ahab’s arm.

“Avast!” roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks—“Man the boat!
Which way heading?”

“Good God!” cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put.
“What’s the matter? He was heading east, I think.—Is your Captain
crazy?” whispering Fedallah.

But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to
take the boat’s steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle
towards him, commanded the ship’s sailors to stand by to lower.

In a moment he was standing in the boat’s stern, and the Manilla men
were springing to their oars. In vain the English Captain hailed him.
With back to the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to his own,
Ahab stood upright till alongside of the Pequod.


CHAPTER 101. The Decanter.

Ere the English ship fades from sight, be it set down here, that she
hailed from London, and was named after the late Samuel Enderby,
merchant of that city, the original of the famous whaling house of
Enderby & Sons; a house which in my poor whaleman’s opinion, comes not
far behind the united royal houses of the Tudors and Bourbons, in point
of real historical interest. How long, prior to the year of our Lord
1775, this great whaling house was in existence, my numerous
fish-documents do not make plain; but in that year (1775) it fitted out
the first English ships that ever regularly hunted the Sperm Whale;
though for some score of years previous (ever since 1726) our valiant
Coffins and Maceys of Nantucket and the Vineyard had in large fleets
pursued that Leviathan, but only in the North and South Atlantic: not
elsewhere. Be it distinctly recorded here, that the Nantucketers were
the first among mankind to harpoon with civilized steel the great Sperm
Whale; and that for half a century they were the only people of the
whole globe who so harpooned him.

In 1778, a fine ship, the Amelia, fitted out for the express purpose,
and at the sole charge of the vigorous Enderbys, boldly rounded Cape
Horn, and was the first among the nations to lower a whale-boat of any
sort in the great South Sea. The voyage was a skilful and lucky one;
and returning to her berth with her hold full of the precious sperm,
the Amelia’s example was soon followed by other ships, English and
American, and thus the vast Sperm Whale grounds of the Pacific were
thrown open. But not content with this good deed, the indefatigable
house again bestirred itself: Samuel and all his Sons—how many, their
mother only knows—and under their immediate auspices, and partly, I
think, at their expense, the British government was induced to send the
sloop-of-war Rattler on a whaling voyage of discovery into the South
Sea. Commanded by a naval Post-Captain, the Rattler made a rattling
voyage of it, and did some service; how much does not appear. But this
is not all. In 1819, the same house fitted out a discovery whale ship
of their own, to go on a tasting cruise to the remote waters of Japan.
That ship—well called the “Syren”—made a noble experimental cruise; and
it was thus that the great Japanese Whaling Ground first became
generally known. The Syren in this famous voyage was commanded by a
Captain Coffin, a Nantucketer.

All honor to the Enderbies, therefore, whose house, I think, exists to
the present day; though doubtless the original Samuel must long ago
have slipped his cable for the great South Sea of the other world.

The ship named after him was worthy of the honor, being a very fast
sailer and a noble craft every way. I boarded her once at midnight
somewhere off the Patagonian coast, and drank good flip down in the
forecastle. It was a fine gam we had, and they were all trumps—every
soul on board. A short life to them, and a jolly death. And that fine
gam I had—long, very long after old Ahab touched her planks with his
ivory heel—it minds me of the noble, solid, Saxon hospitality of that
ship; and may my parson forget me, and the devil remember me, if I ever
lose sight of it. Flip? Did I say we had flip? Yes, and we flipped it
at the rate of ten gallons the hour; and when the squall came (for it’s
squally off there by Patagonia), and all hands—visitors and all—were
called to reef topsails, we were so top-heavy that we had to swing each
other aloft in bowlines; and we ignorantly furled the skirts of our
jackets into the sails, so that we hung there, reefed fast in the
howling gale, a warning example to all drunken tars. However, the masts
did not go overboard; and by and by we scrambled down, so sober, that
we had to pass the flip again, though the savage salt spray bursting
down the forecastle scuttle, rather too much diluted and pickled it to
my taste.

The beef was fine—tough, but with body in it. They said it was
bull-beef; others, that it was dromedary beef; but I do not know, for
certain, how that was. They had dumplings too; small, but substantial,
symmetrically globular, and indestructible dumplings. I fancied that
you could feel them, and roll them about in you after they were
swallowed. If you stooped over too far forward, you risked their
pitching out of you like billiard-balls. The bread—but that couldn’t be
helped; besides, it was an anti-scorbutic; in short, the bread
contained the only fresh fare they had. But the forecastle was not very
light, and it was very easy to step over into a dark corner when you
ate it. But all in all, taking her from truck to helm, considering the
dimensions of the cook’s boilers, including his own live parchment
boilers; fore and aft, I say, the Samuel Enderby was a jolly ship; of
good fare and plenty; fine flip and strong; crack fellows all, and
capital from boot heels to hat-band.

But why was it, think ye, that the Samuel Enderby, and some other
English whalers I know of—not all though—were such famous, hospitable
ships; that passed round the beef, and the bread, and the can, and the
joke; and were not soon weary of eating, and drinking, and laughing? I
will tell you. The abounding good cheer of these English whalers is
matter for historical research. Nor have I been at all sparing of
historical whale research, when it has seemed needed.

The English were preceded in the whale fishery by the Hollanders,
Zealanders, and Danes; from whom they derived many terms still extant
in the fishery; and what is yet more, their fat old fashions, touching
plenty to eat and drink. For, as a general thing, the English
merchant-ship scrimps her crew; but not so the English whaler. Hence,
in the English, this thing of whaling good cheer is not normal and
natural, but incidental and particular; and, therefore, must have some
special origin, which is here pointed out, and will be still further
elucidated.

During my researches in the Leviathanic histories, I stumbled upon an
ancient Dutch volume, which, by the musty whaling smell of it, I knew
must be about whalers. The title was, “Dan Coopman,” wherefore I
concluded that this must be the invaluable memoirs of some Amsterdam
cooper in the fishery, as every whale ship must carry its cooper. I was
reinforced in this opinion by seeing that it was the production of one
“Fitz Swackhammer.” But my friend Dr. Snodhead, a very learned man,
professor of Low Dutch and High German in the college of Santa Claus
and St. Pott’s, to whom I handed the work for translation, giving him a
box of sperm candles for his trouble—this same Dr. Snodhead, so soon as
he spied the book, assured me that “Dan Coopman” did not mean “The
Cooper,” but “The Merchant.” In short, this ancient and learned Low
Dutch book treated of the commerce of Holland; and, among other
subjects, contained a very interesting account of its whale fishery.
And in this chapter it was, headed, “Smeer,” or “Fat,” that I found a
long detailed list of the outfits for the larders and cellars of 180
sail of Dutch whalemen; from which list, as translated by Dr. Snodhead,
I transcribe the following:

400,000 lbs. of beef. 60,000 lbs. Friesland pork. 150,000 lbs. of stock
fish. 550,000 lbs. of biscuit. 72,000 lbs. of soft bread. 2,800 firkins
of butter. 20,000 lbs. Texel & Leyden cheese. 144,000 lbs. cheese
(probably an inferior article). 550 ankers of Geneva. 10,800 barrels of
beer.

Most statistical tables are parchingly dry in the reading; not so in
the present case, however, where the reader is flooded with whole
pipes, barrels, quarts, and gills of good gin and good cheer.

At the time, I devoted three days to the studious digesting of all this
beer, beef, and bread, during which many profound thoughts were
incidentally suggested to me, capable of a transcendental and Platonic
application; and, furthermore, I compiled supplementary tables of my
own, touching the probable quantity of stock-fish, etc., consumed by
every Low Dutch harpooneer in that ancient Greenland and Spitzbergen
whale fishery. In the first place, the amount of butter, and Texel and
Leyden cheese consumed, seems amazing. I impute it, though, to their
naturally unctuous natures, being rendered still more unctuous by the
nature of their vocation, and especially by their pursuing their game
in those frigid Polar Seas, on the very coasts of that Esquimaux
country where the convivial natives pledge each other in bumpers of
train oil.

The quantity of beer, too, is very large, 10,800 barrels. Now, as those
polar fisheries could only be prosecuted in the short summer of that
climate, so that the whole cruise of one of these Dutch whalemen,
including the short voyage to and from the Spitzbergen sea, did not
much exceed three months, say, and reckoning 30 men to each of their
fleet of 180 sail, we have 5,400 Low Dutch seamen in all; therefore, I
say, we have precisely two barrels of beer per man, for a twelve weeks’
allowance, exclusive of his fair proportion of that 550 ankers of gin.
Now, whether these gin and beer harpooneers, so fuddled as one might
fancy them to have been, were the right sort of men to stand up in a
boat’s head, and take good aim at flying whales; this would seem
somewhat improbable. Yet they did aim at them, and hit them too. But
this was very far North, be it remembered, where beer agrees well with
the constitution; upon the Equator, in our southern fishery, beer would
be apt to make the harpooneer sleepy at the mast-head and boozy in his
boat; and grievous loss might ensue to Nantucket and New Bedford.

But no more; enough has been said to show that the old Dutch whalers of
two or three centuries ago were high livers; and that the English
whalers have not neglected so excellent an example. For, say they, when
cruising in an empty ship, if you can get nothing better out of the
world, get a good dinner out of it, at least. And this empties the
decanter.


CHAPTER 102. A Bower in the Arsacides.

Hitherto, in descriptively treating of the Sperm Whale, I have chiefly
dwelt upon the marvels of his outer aspect; or separately and in detail
upon some few interior structural features. But to a large and thorough
sweeping comprehension of him, it behooves me now to unbutton him still
further, and untagging the points of his hose, unbuckling his garters,
and casting loose the hooks and the eyes of the joints of his innermost
bones, set him before you in his ultimatum; that is to say, in his
unconditional skeleton.

But how now, Ishmael? How is it, that you, a mere oarsman in the
fishery, pretend to know aught about the subterranean parts of the
whale? Did erudite Stubb, mounted upon your capstan, deliver lectures
on the anatomy of the Cetacea; and by help of the windlass, hold up a
specimen rib for exhibition? Explain thyself, Ishmael. Can you land a
full-grown whale on your deck for examination, as a cook dishes a
roast-pig? Surely not. A veritable witness have you hitherto been,
Ishmael; but have a care how you seize the privilege of Jonah alone;
the privilege of discoursing upon the joists and beams; the rafters,
ridge-pole, sleepers, and under-pinnings, making up the frame-work of
leviathan; and belike of the tallow-vats, dairy-rooms, butteries, and
cheeseries in his bowels.

I confess, that since Jonah, few whalemen have penetrated very far
beneath the skin of the adult whale; nevertheless, I have been blessed
with an opportunity to dissect him in miniature. In a ship I belonged
to, a small cub Sperm Whale was once bodily hoisted to the deck for his
poke or bag, to make sheaths for the barbs of the harpoons, and for the
heads of the lances. Think you I let that chance go, without using my
boat-hatchet and jack-knife, and breaking the seal and reading all the
contents of that young cub?

And as for my exact knowledge of the bones of the leviathan in their
gigantic, full grown development, for that rare knowledge I am indebted
to my late royal friend Tranquo, king of Tranque, one of the Arsacides.
For being at Tranque, years ago, when attached to the trading-ship Dey
of Algiers, I was invited to spend part of the Arsacidean holidays with
the lord of Tranque, at his retired palm villa at Pupella; a sea-side
glen not very far distant from what our sailors called Bamboo-Town, his
capital.

Among many other fine qualities, my royal friend Tranquo, being gifted
with a devout love for all matters of barbaric vertu, had brought
together in Pupella whatever rare things the more ingenious of his
people could invent; chiefly carved woods of wonderful devices,
chiselled shells, inlaid spears, costly paddles, aromatic canoes; and
all these distributed among whatever natural wonders, the
wonder-freighted, tribute-rendering waves had cast upon his shores.

Chief among these latter was a great Sperm Whale, which, after an
unusually long raging gale, had been found dead and stranded, with his
head against a cocoa-nut tree, whose plumage-like, tufted droopings
seemed his verdant jet. When the vast body had at last been stripped of
its fathom-deep enfoldings, and the bones become dust dry in the sun,
then the skeleton was carefully transported up the Pupella glen, where
a grand temple of lordly palms now sheltered it.

The ribs were hung with trophies; the vertebræ were carved with
Arsacidean annals, in strange hieroglyphics; in the skull, the priests
kept up an unextinguished aromatic flame, so that the mystic head again
sent forth its vapory spout; while, suspended from a bough, the
terrific lower jaw vibrated over all the devotees, like the hair-hung
sword that so affrighted Damocles.

It was a wondrous sight. The wood was green as mosses of the Icy Glen;
the trees stood high and haughty, feeling their living sap; the
industrious earth beneath was as a weaver’s loom, with a gorgeous
carpet on it, whereof the ground-vine tendrils formed the warp and
woof, and the living flowers the figures. All the trees, with all their
laden branches; all the shrubs, and ferns, and grasses; the
message-carrying air; all these unceasingly were active. Through the
lacings of the leaves, the great sun seemed a flying shuttle weaving
the unwearied verdure. Oh, busy weaver! unseen weaver!—pause!—one
word!—whither flows the fabric? what palace may it deck? wherefore all
these ceaseless toilings? Speak, weaver!—stay thy hand!—but one single
word with thee! Nay—the shuttle flies—the figures float from forth the
loom; the freshet-rushing carpet for ever slides away. The weaver-god,
he weaves; and by that weaving is he deafened, that he hears no mortal
voice; and by that humming, we, too, who look on the loom are deafened;
and only when we escape it shall we hear the thousand voices that speak
through it. For even so it is in all material factories. The spoken
words that are inaudible among the flying spindles; those same words
are plainly heard without the walls, bursting from the opened
casements. Thereby have villainies been detected. Ah, mortal! then, be
heedful; for so, in all this din of the great world’s loom, thy
subtlest thinkings may be overheard afar.

Now, amid the green, life-restless loom of that Arsacidean wood, the
great, white, worshipped skeleton lay lounging—a gigantic idler! Yet,
as the ever-woven verdant warp and woof intermixed and hummed around
him, the mighty idler seemed the cunning weaver; himself all woven over
with the vines; every month assuming greener, fresher verdure; but
himself a skeleton. Life folded Death; Death trellised Life; the grim
god wived with youthful Life, and begat him curly-headed glories.

Now, when with royal Tranquo I visited this wondrous whale, and saw the
skull an altar, and the artificial smoke ascending from where the real
jet had issued, I marvelled that the king should regard a chapel as an
object of vertu. He laughed. But more I marvelled that the priests
should swear that smoky jet of his was genuine. To and fro I paced
before this skeleton—brushed the vines aside—broke through the ribs—and
with a ball of Arsacidean twine, wandered, eddied long amid its many
winding, shaded colonnades and arbours. But soon my line was out; and
following it back, I emerged from the opening where I entered. I saw no
living thing within; naught was there but bones.

Cutting me a green measuring-rod, I once more dived within the
skeleton. From their arrow-slit in the skull, the priests perceived me
taking the altitude of the final rib, “How now!” they shouted; “Dar’st
thou measure this our god! That’s for us.” “Aye, priests—well, how long
do ye make him, then?” But hereupon a fierce contest rose among them,
concerning feet and inches; they cracked each other’s sconces with
their yard-sticks—the great skull echoed—and seizing that lucky chance,
I quickly concluded my own admeasurements.

These admeasurements I now propose to set before you. But first, be it
recorded, that, in this matter, I am not free to utter any fancied
measurement I please. Because there are skeleton authorities you can
refer to, to test my accuracy. There is a Leviathanic Museum, they tell
me, in Hull, England, one of the whaling ports of that country, where
they have some fine specimens of fin-backs and other whales. Likewise,
I have heard that in the museum of Manchester, in New Hampshire, they
have what the proprietors call “the only perfect specimen of a
Greenland or River Whale in the United States.” Moreover, at a place in
Yorkshire, England, Burton Constable by name, a certain Sir Clifford
Constable has in his possession the skeleton of a Sperm Whale, but of
moderate size, by no means of the full-grown magnitude of my friend
King Tranquo’s.

In both cases, the stranded whales to which these two skeletons
belonged, were originally claimed by their proprietors upon similar
grounds. King Tranquo seizing his because he wanted it; and Sir
Clifford, because he was lord of the seignories of those parts. Sir
Clifford’s whale has been articulated throughout; so that, like a great
chest of drawers, you can open and shut him, in all his bony
cavities—spread out his ribs like a gigantic fan—and swing all day upon
his lower jaw. Locks are to be put upon some of his trap-doors and
shutters; and a footman will show round future visitors with a bunch of
keys at his side. Sir Clifford thinks of charging twopence for a peep
at the whispering gallery in the spinal column; threepence to hear the
echo in the hollow of his cerebellum; and sixpence for the unrivalled
view from his forehead.

The skeleton dimensions I shall now proceed to set down are copied
verbatim from my right arm, where I had them tattooed; as in my wild
wanderings at that period, there was no other secure way of preserving
such valuable statistics. But as I was crowded for space, and wished
the other parts of my body to remain a blank page for a poem I was then
composing—at least, what untattooed parts might remain—I did not
trouble myself with the odd inches; nor, indeed, should inches at all
enter into a congenial admeasurement of the whale.


CHAPTER 103. Measurement of The Whale’s Skeleton.

In the first place, I wish to lay before you a particular, plain
statement, touching the living bulk of this leviathan, whose skeleton
we are briefly to exhibit. Such a statement may prove useful here.

According to a careful calculation I have made, and which I partly base
upon Captain Scoresby’s estimate, of seventy tons for the largest sized
Greenland whale of sixty feet in length; according to my careful
calculation, I say, a Sperm Whale of the largest magnitude, between
eighty-five and ninety feet in length, and something less than forty
feet in its fullest circumference, such a whale will weigh at least
ninety tons; so that, reckoning thirteen men to a ton, he would
considerably outweigh the combined population of a whole village of one
thousand one hundred inhabitants.

Think you not then that brains, like yoked cattle, should be put to
this leviathan, to make him at all budge to any landsman’s imagination?

Having already in various ways put before you his skull, spout-hole,
jaw, teeth, tail, forehead, fins, and divers other parts, I shall now
simply point out what is most interesting in the general bulk of his
unobstructed bones. But as the colossal skull embraces so very large a
proportion of the entire extent of the skeleton; as it is by far the
most complicated part; and as nothing is to be repeated concerning it
in this chapter, you must not fail to carry it in your mind, or under
your arm, as we proceed, otherwise you will not gain a complete notion
of the general structure we are about to view.

In length, the Sperm Whale’s skeleton at Tranque measured seventy-two
feet; so that when fully invested and extended in life, he must have
been ninety feet long; for in the whale, the skeleton loses about one
fifth in length compared with the living body. Of this seventy-two
feet, his skull and jaw comprised some twenty feet, leaving some fifty
feet of plain back-bone. Attached to this back-bone, for something less
than a third of its length, was the mighty circular basket of ribs
which once enclosed his vitals.

To me this vast ivory-ribbed chest, with the long, unrelieved spine,
extending far away from it in a straight line, not a little resembled
the hull of a great ship new-laid upon the stocks, when only some
twenty of her naked bow-ribs are inserted, and the keel is otherwise,
for the time, but a long, disconnected timber.

The ribs were ten on a side. The first, to begin from the neck, was
nearly six feet long; the second, third, and fourth were each
successively longer, till you came to the climax of the fifth, or one
of the middle ribs, which measured eight feet and some inches. From
that part, the remaining ribs diminished, till the tenth and last only
spanned five feet and some inches. In general thickness, they all bore
a seemly correspondence to their length. The middle ribs were the most
arched. In some of the Arsacides they are used for beams whereon to lay
footpath bridges over small streams.

In considering these ribs, I could not but be struck anew with the
circumstance, so variously repeated in this book, that the skeleton of
the whale is by no means the mould of his invested form. The largest of
the Tranque ribs, one of the middle ones, occupied that part of the
fish which, in life, is greatest in depth. Now, the greatest depth of
the invested body of this particular whale must have been at least
sixteen feet; whereas, the corresponding rib measured but little more
than eight feet. So that this rib only conveyed half of the true notion
of the living magnitude of that part. Besides, for some way, where I
now saw but a naked spine, all that had been once wrapped round with
tons of added bulk in flesh, muscle, blood, and bowels. Still more, for
the ample fins, I here saw but a few disordered joints; and in place of
the weighty and majestic, but boneless flukes, an utter blank!

How vain and foolish, then, thought I, for timid untravelled man to try
to comprehend aright this wondrous whale, by merely poring over his
dead attenuated skeleton, stretched in this peaceful wood. No. Only in
the heart of quickest perils; only when within the eddyings of his
angry flukes; only on the profound unbounded sea, can the fully
invested whale be truly and livingly found out.

But the spine. For that, the best way we can consider it is, with a
crane, to pile its bones high up on end. No speedy enterprise. But now
it’s done, it looks much like Pompey’s Pillar.

There are forty and odd vertebræ in all, which in the skeleton are not
locked together. They mostly lie like the great knobbed blocks on a
Gothic spire, forming solid courses of heavy masonry. The largest, a
middle one, is in width something less than three feet, and in depth
more than four. The smallest, where the spine tapers away into the
tail, is only two inches in width, and looks something like a white
billiard-ball. I was told that there were still smaller ones, but they
had been lost by some little cannibal urchins, the priest’s children,
who had stolen them to play marbles with. Thus we see how that the
spine of even the hugest of living things tapers off at last into
simple child’s play.


CHAPTER 104. The Fossil Whale.

From his mighty bulk the whale affords a most congenial theme whereon
to enlarge, amplify, and generally expatiate. Would you, you could not
compress him. By good rights he should only be treated of in imperial
folio. Not to tell over again his furlongs from spiracle to tail, and
the yards he measures about the waist; only think of the gigantic
involutions of his intestines, where they lie in him like great cables
and hawsers coiled away in the subterranean orlop-deck of a
line-of-battle-ship.

Since I have undertaken to manhandle this Leviathan, it behooves me to
approve myself omnisciently exhaustive in the enterprise; not
overlooking the minutest seminal germs of his blood, and spinning him
out to the uttermost coil of his bowels. Having already described him
in most of his present habitatory and anatomical peculiarities, it now
remains to magnify him in an archæological, fossiliferous, and
antediluvian point of view. Applied to any other creature than the
Leviathan—to an ant or a flea—such portly terms might justly be deemed
unwarrantably grandiloquent. But when Leviathan is the text, the case
is altered. Fain am I to stagger to this emprise under the weightiest
words of the dictionary. And here be it said, that whenever it has been
convenient to consult one in the course of these dissertations, I have
invariably used a huge quarto edition of Johnson, expressly purchased
for that purpose; because that famous lexicographer’s uncommon personal
bulk more fitted him to compile a lexicon to be used by a whale author
like me.

One often hears of writers that rise and swell with their subject,
though it may seem but an ordinary one. How, then, with me, writing of
this Leviathan? Unconsciously my chirography expands into placard
capitals. Give me a condor’s quill! Give me Vesuvius’ crater for an
inkstand! Friends, hold my arms! For in the mere act of penning my
thoughts of this Leviathan, they weary me, and make me faint with their
outreaching comprehensiveness of sweep, as if to include the whole
circle of the sciences, and all the generations of whales, and men, and
mastodons, past, present, and to come, with all the revolving panoramas
of empire on earth, and throughout the whole universe, not excluding
its suburbs. Such, and so magnifying, is the virtue of a large and
liberal theme! We expand to its bulk. To produce a mighty book, you
must choose a mighty theme. No great and enduring volume can ever be
written on the flea, though many there be who have tried it.

Ere entering upon the subject of Fossil Whales, I present my
credentials as a geologist, by stating that in my miscellaneous time I
have been a stone-mason, and also a great digger of ditches, canals and
wells, wine-vaults, cellars, and cisterns of all sorts. Likewise, by
way of preliminary, I desire to remind the reader, that while in the
earlier geological strata there are found the fossils of monsters now
almost completely extinct; the subsequent relics discovered in what are
called the Tertiary formations seem the connecting, or at any rate
intercepted links, between the antichronical creatures, and those whose
remote posterity are said to have entered the Ark; all the Fossil
Whales hitherto discovered belong to the Tertiary period, which is the
last preceding the superficial formations. And though none of them
precisely answer to any known species of the present time, they are yet
sufficiently akin to them in general respects, to justify their taking
rank as Cetacean fossils.

Detached broken fossils of pre-adamite whales, fragments of their bones
and skeletons, have within thirty years past, at various intervals,
been found at the base of the Alps, in Lombardy, in France, in England,
in Scotland, and in the States of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama.
Among the more curious of such remains is part of a skull, which in the
year 1779 was disinterred in the Rue Dauphine in Paris, a short street
opening almost directly upon the palace of the Tuileries; and bones
disinterred in excavating the great docks of Antwerp, in Napoleon’s
time. Cuvier pronounced these fragments to have belonged to some
utterly unknown Leviathanic species.

But by far the most wonderful of all Cetacean relics was the almost
complete vast skeleton of an extinct monster, found in the year 1842,
on the plantation of Judge Creagh, in Alabama. The awe-stricken
credulous slaves in the vicinity took it for the bones of one of the
fallen angels. The Alabama doctors declared it a huge reptile, and
bestowed upon it the name of Basilosaurus. But some specimen bones of
it being taken across the sea to Owen, the English Anatomist, it turned
out that this alleged reptile was a whale, though of a departed
species. A significant illustration of the fact, again and again
repeated in this book, that the skeleton of the whale furnishes but
little clue to the shape of his fully invested body. So Owen
rechristened the monster Zeuglodon; and in his paper read before the
London Geological Society, pronounced it, in substance, one of the most
extraordinary creatures which the mutations of the globe have blotted
out of existence.

When I stand among these mighty Leviathan skeletons, skulls, tusks,
jaws, ribs, and vertebræ, all characterized by partial resemblances to
the existing breeds of sea-monsters; but at the same time bearing on
the other hand similar affinities to the annihilated antichronical
Leviathans, their incalculable seniors; I am, by a flood, borne back to
that wondrous period, ere time itself can be said to have begun; for
time began with man. Here Saturn’s grey chaos rolls over me, and I
obtain dim, shuddering glimpses into those Polar eternities; when
wedged bastions of ice pressed hard upon what are now the Tropics; and
in all the 25,000 miles of this world’s circumference, not an
inhabitable hand’s breadth of land was visible. Then the whole world
was the whale’s; and, king of creation, he left his wake along the
present lines of the Andes and the Himmalehs. Who can show a pedigree
like Leviathan? Ahab’s harpoon had shed older blood than the Pharaoh’s.
Methuselah seems a school-boy. I look round to shake hands with Shem. I
am horror-struck at this antemosaic, unsourced existence of the
unspeakable terrors of the whale, which, having been before all time,
must needs exist after all humane ages are over.

But not alone has this Leviathan left his pre-adamite traces in the
stereotype plates of nature, and in limestone and marl bequeathed his
ancient bust; but upon Egyptian tablets, whose antiquity seems to claim
for them an almost fossiliferous character, we find the unmistakable
print of his fin. In an apartment of the great temple of Denderah, some
fifty years ago, there was discovered upon the granite ceiling a
sculptured and painted planisphere, abounding in centaurs, griffins,
and dolphins, similar to the grotesque figures on the celestial globe
of the moderns. Gliding among them, old Leviathan swam as of yore; was
there swimming in that planisphere, centuries before Solomon was
cradled.

Nor must there be omitted another strange attestation of the antiquity
of the whale, in his own osseous post-diluvian reality, as set down by
the venerable John Leo, the old Barbary traveller.

“Not far from the Sea-side, they have a Temple, the Rafters and Beams
of which are made of Whale-Bones; for Whales of a monstrous size are
oftentimes cast up dead upon that shore. The Common People imagine,
that by a secret Power bestowed by God upon the Temple, no Whale can
pass it without immediate death. But the truth of the Matter is, that
on either side of the Temple, there are Rocks that shoot two Miles into
the Sea, and wound the Whales when they light upon ’em. They keep a
Whale’s Rib of an incredible length for a Miracle, which lying upon the
Ground with its convex part uppermost, makes an Arch, the Head of which
cannot be reached by a Man upon a Camel’s Back. This Rib (says John
Leo) is said to have layn there a hundred Years before I saw it. Their
Historians affirm, that a Prophet who prophesy’d of Mahomet, came from
this Temple, and some do not stand to assert, that the Prophet Jonas
was cast forth by the Whale at the Base of the Temple.”

In this Afric Temple of the Whale I leave you, reader, and if you be a
Nantucketer, and a whaleman, you will silently worship there.


CHAPTER 105. Does the Whale’s Magnitude Diminish?—Will He Perish?

Inasmuch, then, as this Leviathan comes floundering down upon us from
the head-waters of the Eternities, it may be fitly inquired, whether,
in the long course of his generations, he has not degenerated from the
original bulk of his sires.

But upon investigation we find, that not only are the whales of the
present day superior in magnitude to those whose fossil remains are
found in the Tertiary system (embracing a distinct geological period
prior to man), but of the whales found in that Tertiary system, those
belonging to its latter formations exceed in size those of its earlier
ones.

Of all the pre-adamite whales yet exhumed, by far the largest is the
Alabama one mentioned in the last chapter, and that was less than
seventy feet in length in the skeleton. Whereas, we have already seen,
that the tape-measure gives seventy-two feet for the skeleton of a
large sized modern whale. And I have heard, on whalemen’s authority,
that Sperm Whales have been captured near a hundred feet long at the
time of capture.

But may it not be, that while the whales of the present hour are an
advance in magnitude upon those of all previous geological periods; may
it not be, that since Adam’s time they have degenerated?

Assuredly, we must conclude so, if we are to credit the accounts of
such gentlemen as Pliny, and the ancient naturalists generally. For
Pliny tells us of whales that embraced acres of living bulk, and
Aldrovandus of others which measured eight hundred feet in length—Rope
Walks and Thames Tunnels of Whales! And even in the days of Banks and
Solander, Cooke’s naturalists, we find a Danish member of the Academy
of Sciences setting down certain Iceland Whales (reydan-siskur, or
Wrinkled Bellies) at one hundred and twenty yards; that is, three
hundred and sixty feet. And Lacépède, the French naturalist, in his
elaborate history of whales, in the very beginning of his work (page
3), sets down the Right Whale at one hundred metres, three hundred and
twenty-eight feet. And this work was published so late as A.D. 1825.

But will any whaleman believe these stories? No. The whale of to-day is
as big as his ancestors in Pliny’s time. And if ever I go where Pliny
is, I, a whaleman (more than he was), will make bold to tell him so.
Because I cannot understand how it is, that while the Egyptian mummies
that were buried thousands of years before even Pliny was born, do not
measure so much in their coffins as a modern Kentuckian in his socks;
and while the cattle and other animals sculptured on the oldest
Egyptian and Nineveh tablets, by the relative proportions in which they
are drawn, just as plainly prove that the high-bred, stall-fed, prize
cattle of Smithfield, not only equal, but far exceed in magnitude the
fattest of Pharaoh’s fat kine; in the face of all this, I will not
admit that of all animals the whale alone should have degenerated.

But still another inquiry remains; one often agitated by the more
recondite Nantucketers. Whether owing to the almost omniscient
look-outs at the mast-heads of the whale-ships, now penetrating even
through Behring’s straits, and into the remotest secret drawers and
lockers of the world; and the thousand harpoons and lances darted along
all continental coasts; the moot point is, whether Leviathan can long
endure so wide a chase, and so remorseless a havoc; whether he must not
at last be exterminated from the waters, and the last whale, like the
last man, smoke his last pipe, and then himself evaporate in the final
puff.

Comparing the humped herds of whales with the humped herds of buffalo,
which, not forty years ago, overspread by tens of thousands the
prairies of Illinois and Missouri, and shook their iron manes and
scowled with their thunder-clotted brows upon the sites of populous
river-capitals, where now the polite broker sells you land at a dollar
an inch; in such a comparison an irresistible argument would seem
furnished, to show that the hunted whale cannot now escape speedy
extinction.

But you must look at this matter in every light. Though so short a
period ago—not a good lifetime—the census of the buffalo in Illinois
exceeded the census of men now in London, and though at the present day
not one horn or hoof of them remains in all that region; and though the
cause of this wondrous extermination was the spear of man; yet the far
different nature of the whale-hunt peremptorily forbids so inglorious
an end to the Leviathan. Forty men in one ship hunting the Sperm Whales
for forty-eight months think they have done extremely well, and thank
God, if at last they carry home the oil of forty fish. Whereas, in the
days of the old Canadian and Indian hunters and trappers of the West,
when the far west (in whose sunset suns still rise) was a wilderness
and a virgin, the same number of moccasined men, for the same number of
months, mounted on horse instead of sailing in ships, would have slain
not forty, but forty thousand and more buffaloes; a fact that, if need
were, could be statistically stated.

Nor, considered aright, does it seem any argument in favour of the
gradual extinction of the Sperm Whale, for example, that in former
years (the latter part of the last century, say) these Leviathans, in
small pods, were encountered much oftener than at present, and, in
consequence, the voyages were not so prolonged, and were also much more
remunerative. Because, as has been elsewhere noticed, those whales,
influenced by some views to safety, now swim the seas in immense
caravans, so that to a large degree the scattered solitaries, yokes,
and pods, and schools of other days are now aggregated into vast but
widely separated, unfrequent armies. That is all. And equally
fallacious seems the conceit, that because the so-called whale-bone
whales no longer haunt many grounds in former years abounding with
them, hence that species also is declining. For they are only being
driven from promontory to cape; and if one coast is no longer enlivened
with their jets, then, be sure, some other and remoter strand has been
very recently startled by the unfamiliar spectacle.

Furthermore: concerning these last mentioned Leviathans, they have two
firm fortresses, which, in all human probability, will for ever remain
impregnable. And as upon the invasion of their valleys, the frosty
Swiss have retreated to their mountains; so, hunted from the savannas
and glades of the middle seas, the whale-bone whales can at last resort
to their Polar citadels, and diving under the ultimate glassy barriers
and walls there, come up among icy fields and floes; and in a charmed
circle of everlasting December, bid defiance to all pursuit from man.

But as perhaps fifty of these whale-bone whales are harpooned for one
cachalot, some philosophers of the forecastle have concluded that this
positive havoc has already very seriously diminished their battalions.
But though for some time past a number of these whales, not less than
13,000, have been annually slain on the nor’ west coast by the
Americans alone; yet there are considerations which render even this
circumstance of little or no account as an opposing argument in this
matter.

Natural as it is to be somewhat incredulous concerning the populousness
of the more enormous creatures of the globe, yet what shall we say to
Harto, the historian of Goa, when he tells us that at one hunting the
King of Siam took 4,000 elephants; that in those regions elephants are
numerous as droves of cattle in the temperate climes. And there seems
no reason to doubt that if these elephants, which have now been hunted
for thousands of years, by Semiramis, by Porus, by Hannibal, and by all
the successive monarchs of the East—if they still survive there in
great numbers, much more may the great whale outlast all hunting, since
he has a pasture to expatiate in, which is precisely twice as large as
all Asia, both Americas, Europe and Africa, New Holland, and all the
Isles of the sea combined.

Moreover: we are to consider, that from the presumed great longevity of
whales, their probably attaining the age of a century and more,
therefore at any one period of time, several distinct adult generations
must be contemporary. And what that is, we may soon gain some idea of,
by imagining all the grave-yards, cemeteries, and family vaults of
creation yielding up the live bodies of all the men, women, and
children who were alive seventy-five years ago; and adding this
countless host to the present human population of the globe.

Wherefore, for all these things, we account the whale immortal in his
species, however perishable in his individuality. He swam the seas
before the continents broke water; he once swam over the site of the
Tuileries, and Windsor Castle, and the Kremlin. In Noah’s flood he
despised Noah’s Ark; and if ever the world is to be again flooded, like
the Netherlands, to kill off its rats, then the eternal whale will
still survive, and rearing upon the topmost crest of the equatorial
flood, spout his frothed defiance to the skies.


CHAPTER 106. Ahab’s Leg.

The precipitating manner in which Captain Ahab had quitted the Samuel
Enderby of London, had not been unattended with some small violence to
his own person. He had lighted with such energy upon a thwart of his
boat that his ivory leg had received a half-splintering shock. And when
after gaining his own deck, and his own pivot-hole there, he so
vehemently wheeled round with an urgent command to the steersman (it
was, as ever, something about his not steering inflexibly enough);
then, the already shaken ivory received such an additional twist and
wrench, that though it still remained entire, and to all appearances
lusty, yet Ahab did not deem it entirely trustworthy.

And, indeed, it seemed small matter for wonder, that for all his
pervading, mad recklessness, Ahab did at times give careful heed to the
condition of that dead bone upon which he partly stood. For it had not
been very long prior to the Pequod’s sailing from Nantucket, that he
had been found one night lying prone upon the ground, and insensible;
by some unknown, and seemingly inexplicable, unimaginable casualty, his
ivory limb having been so violently displaced, that it had stake-wise
smitten, and all but pierced his groin; nor was it without extreme
difficulty that the agonizing wound was entirely cured.

Nor, at the time, had it failed to enter his monomaniac mind, that all
the anguish of that then present suffering was but the direct issue of
a former woe; and he too plainly seemed to see, that as the most
poisonous reptile of the marsh perpetuates his kind as inevitably as
the sweetest songster of the grove; so, equally with every felicity,
all miserable events do naturally beget their like. Yea, more than
equally, thought Ahab; since both the ancestry and posterity of Grief
go further than the ancestry and posterity of Joy. For, not to hint of
this: that it is an inference from certain canonic teachings, that
while some natural enjoyments here shall have no children born to them
for the other world, but, on the contrary, shall be followed by the
joy-childlessness of all hell’s despair; whereas, some guilty mortal
miseries shall still fertilely beget to themselves an eternally
progressive progeny of griefs beyond the grave; not at all to hint of
this, there still seems an inequality in the deeper analysis of the
thing. For, thought Ahab, while even the highest earthly felicities
ever have a certain unsignifying pettiness lurking in them, but, at
bottom, all heartwoes, a mystic significance, and, in some men, an
archangelic grandeur; so do their diligent tracings-out not belie the
obvious deduction. To trail the genealogies of these high mortal
miseries, carries us at last among the sourceless primogenitures of the
gods; so that, in the face of all the glad, hay-making suns, and soft
cymballing, round harvest-moons, we must needs give in to this: that
the gods themselves are not for ever glad. The ineffaceable, sad
birth-mark in the brow of man, is but the stamp of sorrow in the
signers.

Unwittingly here a secret has been divulged, which perhaps might more
properly, in set way, have been disclosed before. With many other
particulars concerning Ahab, always had it remained a mystery to some,
why it was, that for a certain period, both before and after the
sailing of the Pequod, he had hidden himself away with such
Grand-Lama-like exclusiveness; and, for that one interval, sought
speechless refuge, as it were, among the marble senate of the dead.
Captain Peleg’s bruited reason for this thing appeared by no means
adequate; though, indeed, as touching all Ahab’s deeper part, every
revelation partook more of significant darkness than of explanatory
light. But, in the end, it all came out; this one matter did, at least.
That direful mishap was at the bottom of his temporary recluseness. And
not only this, but to that ever-contracting, dropping circle ashore,
who, for any reason, possessed the privilege of a less banned approach
to him; to that timid circle the above hinted casualty—remaining, as it
did, moodily unaccounted for by Ahab—invested itself with terrors, not
entirely underived from the land of spirits and of wails. So that,
through their zeal for him, they had all conspired, so far as in them
lay, to muffle up the knowledge of this thing from others; and hence it
was, that not till a considerable interval had elapsed, did it
transpire upon the Pequod’s decks.

But be all this as it may; let the unseen, ambiguous synod in the air,
or the vindictive princes and potentates of fire, have to do or not
with earthly Ahab, yet, in this present matter of his leg, he took
plain practical procedures;—he called the carpenter.

And when that functionary appeared before him, he bade him without
delay set about making a new leg, and directed the mates to see him
supplied with all the studs and joists of jaw-ivory (Sperm Whale) which
had thus far been accumulated on the voyage, in order that a careful
selection of the stoutest, clearest-grained stuff might be secured.
This done, the carpenter received orders to have the leg completed that
night; and to provide all the fittings for it, independent of those
pertaining to the distrusted one in use. Moreover, the ship’s forge was
ordered to be hoisted out of its temporary idleness in the hold; and,
to accelerate the affair, the blacksmith was commanded to proceed at
once to the forging of whatever iron contrivances might be needed.


CHAPTER 107. The Carpenter.

Seat thyself sultanically among the moons of Saturn, and take high
abstracted man alone; and he seems a wonder, a grandeur, and a woe. But
from the same point, take mankind in mass, and for the most part, they
seem a mob of unnecessary duplicates, both contemporary and hereditary.
But most humble though he was, and far from furnishing an example of
the high, humane abstraction; the Pequod’s carpenter was no duplicate;
hence, he now comes in person on this stage.

Like all sea-going ship carpenters, and more especially those belonging
to whaling vessels, he was, to a certain off-handed, practical extent,
alike experienced in numerous trades and callings collateral to his
own; the carpenter’s pursuit being the ancient and outbranching trunk
of all those numerous handicrafts which more or less have to do with
wood as an auxiliary material. But, besides the application to him of
the generic remark above, this carpenter of the Pequod was singularly
efficient in those thousand nameless mechanical emergencies continually
recurring in a large ship, upon a three or four years’ voyage, in
uncivilized and far-distant seas. For not to speak of his readiness in
ordinary duties:—repairing stove boats, sprung spars, reforming the
shape of clumsy-bladed oars, inserting bull’s eyes in the deck, or new
tree-nails in the side planks, and other miscellaneous matters more
directly pertaining to his special business; he was moreover
unhesitatingly expert in all manner of conflicting aptitudes, both
useful and capricious.

The one grand stage where he enacted all his various parts so manifold,
was his vice-bench; a long rude ponderous table furnished with several
vices, of different sizes, and both of iron and of wood. At all times
except when whales were alongside, this bench was securely lashed
athwartships against the rear of the Try-works.

A belaying pin is found too large to be easily inserted into its hole:
the carpenter claps it into one of his ever-ready vices, and
straightway files it smaller. A lost land-bird of strange plumage
strays on board, and is made a captive: out of clean shaved rods of
right-whale bone, and cross-beams of sperm whale ivory, the carpenter
makes a pagoda-looking cage for it. An oarsman sprains his wrist: the
carpenter concocts a soothing lotion. Stubb longed for vermillion stars
to be painted upon the blade of his every oar; screwing each oar in his
big vice of wood, the carpenter symmetrically supplies the
constellation. A sailor takes a fancy to wear shark-bone ear-rings: the
carpenter drills his ears. Another has the toothache: the carpenter out
pincers, and clapping one hand upon his bench bids him be seated there;
but the poor fellow unmanageably winces under the unconcluded
operation; whirling round the handle of his wooden vice, the carpenter
signs him to clap his jaw in that, if he would have him draw the tooth.

Thus, this carpenter was prepared at all points, and alike indifferent
and without respect in all. Teeth he accounted bits of ivory; heads he
deemed but top-blocks; men themselves he lightly held for capstans. But
while now upon so wide a field thus variously accomplished and with
such liveliness of expertness in him, too; all this would seem to argue
some uncommon vivacity of intelligence. But not precisely so. For
nothing was this man more remarkable, than for a certain impersonal
stolidity as it were; impersonal, I say; for it so shaded off into the
surrounding infinite of things, that it seemed one with the general
stolidity discernible in the whole visible world; which while
pauselessly active in uncounted modes, still eternally holds its peace,
and ignores you, though you dig foundations for cathedrals. Yet was
this half-horrible stolidity in him, involving, too, as it appeared, an
all-ramifying heartlessness;—yet was it oddly dashed at times, with an
old, crutch-like, antediluvian, wheezing humorousness, not unstreaked
now and then with a certain grizzled wittiness; such as might have
served to pass the time during the midnight watch on the bearded
forecastle of Noah’s ark. Was it that this old carpenter had been a
life-long wanderer, whose much rolling, to and fro, not only had
gathered no moss; but what is more, had rubbed off whatever small
outward clingings might have originally pertained to him? He was a
stript abstract; an unfractioned integral; uncompromised as a new-born
babe; living without premeditated reference to this world or the next.
You might almost say, that this strange uncompromisedness in him
involved a sort of unintelligence; for in his numerous trades, he did
not seem to work so much by reason or by instinct, or simply because he
had been tutored to it, or by any intermixture of all these, even or
uneven; but merely by a kind of deaf and dumb, spontaneous literal
process. He was a pure manipulator; his brain, if he had ever had one,
must have early oozed along into the muscles of his fingers. He was
like one of those unreasoning but still highly useful, _multum in
parvo_, Sheffield contrivances, assuming the exterior—though a little
swelled—of a common pocket knife; but containing, not only blades of
various sizes, but also screw-drivers, cork-screws, tweezers, awls,
pens, rulers, nail-filers, countersinkers. So, if his superiors wanted
to use the carpenter for a screw-driver, all they had to do was to open
that part of him, and the screw was fast: or if for tweezers, take him
up by the legs, and there they were.

Yet, as previously hinted, this omnitooled, open-and-shut carpenter,
was, after all, no mere machine of an automaton. If he did not have a
common soul in him, he had a subtle something that somehow anomalously
did its duty. What that was, whether essence of quicksilver, or a few
drops of hartshorn, there is no telling. But there it was; and there it
had abided for now some sixty years or more. And this it was, this same
unaccountable, cunning life-principle in him; this it was, that kept
him a great part of the time soliloquizing; but only like an
unreasoning wheel, which also hummingly soliloquizes; or rather, his
body was a sentry-box and this soliloquizer on guard there, and talking
all the time to keep himself awake.


CHAPTER 108. Ahab and the Carpenter.

The Deck—First Night Watch.

(_Carpenter standing before his vice-bench, and by the light of two
lanterns busily filing the ivory joist for the leg, which joist is
firmly fixed in the vice. Slabs of ivory, leather straps, pads, screws,
and various tools of all sorts lying about the bench. Forward, the red
flame of the forge is seen, where the blacksmith is at work._)

Drat the file, and drat the bone! That is hard which should be soft,
and that is soft which should be hard. So we go, who file old jaws and
shinbones. Let’s try another. Aye, now, this works better (_sneezes_).
Halloa, this bone dust is (_sneezes_)—why it’s (_sneezes_)—yes it’s
(_sneezes_)—bless my soul, it won’t let me speak! This is what an old
fellow gets now for working in dead lumber. Saw a live tree, and you
don’t get this dust; amputate a live bone, and you don’t get it
(_sneezes_). Come, come, you old Smut, there, bear a hand, and let’s
have that ferule and buckle-screw; I’ll be ready for them presently.
Lucky now (_sneezes_) there’s no knee-joint to make; that might puzzle
a little; but a mere shinbone—why it’s easy as making hop-poles; only I
should like to put a good finish on. Time, time; if I but only had the
time, I could turn him out as neat a leg now as ever (_sneezes_)
scraped to a lady in a parlor. Those buckskin legs and calves of legs
I’ve seen in shop windows wouldn’t compare at all. They soak water,
they do; and of course get rheumatic, and have to be doctored
(_sneezes_) with washes and lotions, just like live legs. There; before
I saw it off, now, I must call his old Mogulship, and see whether the
length will be all right; too short, if anything, I guess. Ha! that’s
the heel; we are in luck; here he comes, or it’s somebody else, that’s
certain.

AHAB (_advancing_). (_During the ensuing scene, the carpenter continues
sneezing at times._)

Well, manmaker!

Just in time, sir. If the captain pleases, I will now mark the length.
Let me measure, sir.

Measured for a leg! good. Well, it’s not the first time. About it!
There; keep thy finger on it. This is a cogent vice thou hast here,
carpenter; let me feel its grip once. So, so; it does pinch some.

Oh, sir, it will break bones—beware, beware!

No fear; I like a good grip; I like to feel something in this slippery
world that can hold, man. What’s Prometheus about there?—the
blacksmith, I mean—what’s he about?

He must be forging the buckle-screw, sir, now.

Right. It’s a partnership; he supplies the muscle part. He makes a
fierce red flame there!

Aye, sir; he must have the white heat for this kind of fine work.

Um-m. So he must. I do deem it now a most meaning thing, that that old
Greek, Prometheus, who made men, they say, should have been a
blacksmith, and animated them with fire; for what’s made in fire must
properly belong to fire; and so hell’s probable. How the soot flies!
This must be the remainder the Greek made the Africans of. Carpenter,
when he’s through with that buckle, tell him to forge a pair of steel
shoulder-blades; there’s a pedlar aboard with a crushing pack.

Sir?

Hold; while Prometheus is about it, I’ll order a complete man after a
desirable pattern. Imprimis, fifty feet high in his socks; then, chest
modelled after the Thames Tunnel; then, legs with roots to ’em, to stay
in one place; then, arms three feet through the wrist; no heart at all,
brass forehead, and about a quarter of an acre of fine brains; and let
me see—shall I order eyes to see outwards? No, but put a sky-light on
top of his head to illuminate inwards. There, take the order, and away.

Now, what’s he speaking about, and who’s he speaking to, I should like
to know? Shall I keep standing here? (_aside_).

’Tis but indifferent architecture to make a blind dome; here’s one. No,
no, no; I must have a lantern.

Ho, ho! That’s it, hey? Here are two, sir; one will serve my turn.

What art thou thrusting that thief-catcher into my face for, man?
Thrusted light is worse than presented pistols.

I thought, sir, that you spoke to carpenter.

Carpenter? why that’s—but no;—a very tidy, and, I may say, an extremely
gentlemanlike sort of business thou art in here, carpenter;—or would’st
thou rather work in clay?

Sir?—Clay? clay, sir? That’s mud; we leave clay to ditchers, sir.

The fellow’s impious! What art thou sneezing about?

Bone is rather dusty, sir.

Take the hint, then; and when thou art dead, never bury thyself under
living people’s noses.

Sir?—oh! ah!—I guess so;—yes—oh, dear!

Look ye, carpenter, I dare say thou callest thyself a right good
workmanlike workman, eh? Well, then, will it speak thoroughly well for
thy work, if, when I come to mount this leg thou makest, I shall
nevertheless feel another leg in the same identical place with it; that
is, carpenter, my old lost leg; the flesh and blood one, I mean. Canst
thou not drive that old Adam away?

Truly, sir, I begin to understand somewhat now. Yes, I have heard
something curious on that score, sir; how that a dismasted man never
entirely loses the feeling of his old spar, but it will be still
pricking him at times. May I humbly ask if it be really so, sir?

It is, man. Look, put thy live leg here in the place where mine once
was; so, now, here is only one distinct leg to the eye, yet two to the
soul. Where thou feelest tingling life; there, exactly there, there to
a hair, do I. Is’t a riddle?

I should humbly call it a poser, sir.

Hist, then. How dost thou know that some entire, living, thinking thing
may not be invisibly and uninterpenetratingly standing precisely where
thou now standest; aye, and standing there in thy spite? In thy most
solitary hours, then, dost thou not fear eavesdroppers? Hold, don’t
speak! And if I still feel the smart of my crushed leg, though it be
now so long dissolved; then, why mayst not thou, carpenter, feel the
fiery pains of hell for ever, and without a body? Hah!

Good Lord! Truly, sir, if it comes to that, I must calculate over
again; I think I didn’t carry a small figure, sir.

Look ye, pudding-heads should never grant premises.—How long before the
leg is done?

Perhaps an hour, sir.

Bungle away at it then, and bring it to me (_turns to go_). Oh, Life!
Here I am, proud as Greek god, and yet standing debtor to this
blockhead for a bone to stand on! Cursed be that mortal
inter-indebtedness which will not do away with ledgers. I would be free
as air; and I’m down in the whole world’s books. I am so rich, I could
have given bid for bid with the wealthiest Prætorians at the auction of
the Roman empire (which was the world’s); and yet I owe for the flesh
in the tongue I brag with. By heavens! I’ll get a crucible, and into
it, and dissolve myself down to one small, compendious vertebra. So.

CARPENTER (_resuming his work_).

Well, well, well! Stubb knows him best of all, and Stubb always says
he’s queer; says nothing but that one sufficient little word queer;
he’s queer, says Stubb; he’s queer—queer, queer; and keeps dinning it
into Mr. Starbuck all the time—queer—sir—queer, queer, very queer. And
here’s his leg! Yes, now that I think of it, here’s his bedfellow! has
a stick of whale’s jaw-bone for a wife! And this is his leg; he’ll
stand on this. What was that now about one leg standing in three
places, and all three places standing in one hell—how was that? Oh! I
don’t wonder he looked so scornful at me! I’m a sort of
strange-thoughted sometimes, they say; but that’s only haphazard-like.
Then, a short, little old body like me, should never undertake to wade
out into deep waters with tall, heron-built captains; the water chucks
you under the chin pretty quick, and there’s a great cry for
life-boats. And here’s the heron’s leg! long and slim, sure enough!
Now, for most folks one pair of legs lasts a lifetime, and that must be
because they use them mercifully, as a tender-hearted old lady uses her
roly-poly old coach-horses. But Ahab; oh he’s a hard driver. Look,
driven one leg to death, and spavined the other for life, and now wears
out bone legs by the cord. Halloa, there, you Smut! bear a hand there
with those screws, and let’s finish it before the resurrection fellow
comes a-calling with his horn for all legs, true or false, as
brewery-men go round collecting old beer barrels, to fill ’em up again.
What a leg this is! It looks like a real live leg, filed down to
nothing but the core; he’ll be standing on this to-morrow; he’ll be
taking altitudes on it. Halloa! I almost forgot the little oval slate,
smoothed ivory, where he figures up the latitude. So, so; chisel, file,
and sand-paper, now!


CHAPTER 109. Ahab and Starbuck in the Cabin.

According to usage they were pumping the ship next morning; and lo! no
inconsiderable oil came up with the water; the casks below must have
sprung a bad leak. Much concern was shown; and Starbuck went down into
the cabin to report this unfavourable affair.*

*In Sperm-whalemen with any considerable quantity of oil on board, it
is a regular semi-weekly duty to conduct a hose into the hold, and
drench the casks with sea-water; which afterwards, at varying
intervals, is removed by the ship’s pumps. Hereby the casks are sought
to be kept damply tight; while by the changed character of the
withdrawn water, the mariners readily detect any serious leakage in the
precious cargo.

Now, from the South and West the Pequod was drawing nigh to Formosa and
the Bashee Isles, between which lies one of the tropical outlets from
the China waters into the Pacific. And so Starbuck found Ahab with a
general chart of the oriental archipelagoes spread before him; and
another separate one representing the long eastern coasts of the
Japanese islands—Niphon, Matsmai, and Sikoke. With his snow-white new
ivory leg braced against the screwed leg of his table, and with a long
pruning-hook of a jack-knife in his hand, the wondrous old man, with
his back to the gangway door, was wrinkling his brow, and tracing his
old courses again.

“Who’s there?” hearing the footstep at the door, but not turning round
to it. “On deck! Begone!”

“Captain Ahab mistakes; it is I. The oil in the hold is leaking, sir.
We must up Burtons and break out.”

“Up Burtons and break out? Now that we are nearing Japan; heave-to here
for a week to tinker a parcel of old hoops?”

“Either do that, sir, or waste in one day more oil than we may make
good in a year. What we come twenty thousand miles to get is worth
saving, sir.”

“So it is, so it is; if we get it.”

“I was speaking of the oil in the hold, sir.”

“And I was not speaking or thinking of that at all. Begone! Let it
leak! I’m all aleak myself. Aye! leaks in leaks! not only full of leaky
casks, but those leaky casks are in a leaky ship; and that’s a far
worse plight than the Pequod’s, man. Yet I don’t stop to plug my leak;
for who can find it in the deep-loaded hull; or how hope to plug it,
even if found, in this life’s howling gale? Starbuck! I’ll not have the
Burtons hoisted.”

“What will the owners say, sir?”

“Let the owners stand on Nantucket beach and outyell the Typhoons. What
cares Ahab? Owners, owners? Thou art always prating to me, Starbuck,
about those miserly owners, as if the owners were my conscience. But
look ye, the only real owner of anything is its commander; and hark ye,
my conscience is in this ship’s keel.—On deck!”

“Captain Ahab,” said the reddening mate, moving further into the cabin,
with a daring so strangely respectful and cautious that it almost
seemed not only every way seeking to avoid the slightest outward
manifestation of itself, but within also seemed more than half
distrustful of itself; “A better man than I might well pass over in
thee what he would quickly enough resent in a younger man; aye, and in
a happier, Captain Ahab.”

“Devils! Dost thou then so much as dare to critically think of me?—On
deck!”

“Nay, sir, not yet; I do entreat. And I do dare, sir—to be forbearing!
Shall we not understand each other better than hitherto, Captain Ahab?”

Ahab seized a loaded musket from the rack (forming part of most
South-Sea-men’s cabin furniture), and pointing it towards Starbuck,
exclaimed: “There is one God that is Lord over the earth, and one
Captain that is lord over the Pequod.—On deck!”

For an instant in the flashing eyes of the mate, and his fiery cheeks,
you would have almost thought that he had really received the blaze of
the levelled tube. But, mastering his emotion, he half calmly rose, and
as he quitted the cabin, paused for an instant and said: “Thou hast
outraged, not insulted me, sir; but for that I ask thee not to beware
of Starbuck; thou wouldst but laugh; but let Ahab beware of Ahab;
beware of thyself, old man.”

“He waxes brave, but nevertheless obeys; most careful bravery that!”
murmured Ahab, as Starbuck disappeared. “What’s that he said—Ahab
beware of Ahab—there’s something there!” Then unconsciously using the
musket for a staff, with an iron brow he paced to and fro in the little
cabin; but presently the thick plaits of his forehead relaxed, and
returning the gun to the rack, he went to the deck.

“Thou art but too good a fellow, Starbuck,” he said lowly to the mate;
then raising his voice to the crew: “Furl the t’gallant-sails, and
close-reef the top-sails, fore and aft; back the main-yard; up Burton,
and break out in the main-hold.”

It were perhaps vain to surmise exactly why it was, that as respecting
Starbuck, Ahab thus acted. It may have been a flash of honesty in him;
or mere prudential policy which, under the circumstance, imperiously
forbade the slightest symptom of open disaffection, however transient,
in the important chief officer of his ship. However it was, his orders
were executed; and the Burtons were hoisted.


CHAPTER 110. Queequeg in His Coffin.

Upon searching, it was found that the casks last struck into the hold
were perfectly sound, and that the leak must be further off. So, it
being calm weather, they broke out deeper and deeper, disturbing the
slumbers of the huge ground-tier butts; and from that black midnight
sending those gigantic moles into the daylight above. So deep did they
go; and so ancient, and corroded, and weedy the aspect of the lowermost
puncheons, that you almost looked next for some mouldy corner-stone
cask containing coins of Captain Noah, with copies of the posted
placards, vainly warning the infatuated old world from the flood.
Tierce after tierce, too, of water, and bread, and beef, and shooks of
staves, and iron bundles of hoops, were hoisted out, till at last the
piled decks were hard to get about; and the hollow hull echoed under
foot, as if you were treading over empty catacombs, and reeled and
rolled in the sea like an air-freighted demijohn. Top-heavy was the
ship as a dinnerless student with all Aristotle in his head. Well was
it that the Typhoons did not visit them then.

Now, at this time it was that my poor pagan companion, and fast
bosom-friend, Queequeg, was seized with a fever, which brought him nigh
to his endless end.

Be it said, that in this vocation of whaling, sinecures are unknown;
dignity and danger go hand in hand; till you get to be Captain, the
higher you rise the harder you toil. So with poor Queequeg, who, as
harpooneer, must not only face all the rage of the living whale, but—as
we have elsewhere seen—mount his dead back in a rolling sea; and
finally descend into the gloom of the hold, and bitterly sweating all
day in that subterraneous confinement, resolutely manhandle the
clumsiest casks and see to their stowage. To be short, among whalemen,
the harpooneers are the holders, so called.

Poor Queequeg! when the ship was about half disembowelled, you should
have stooped over the hatchway, and peered down upon him there; where,
stripped to his woollen drawers, the tattooed savage was crawling about
amid that dampness and slime, like a green spotted lizard at the bottom
of a well. And a well, or an ice-house, it somehow proved to him, poor
pagan; where, strange to say, for all the heat of his sweatings, he
caught a terrible chill which lapsed into a fever; and at last, after
some days’ suffering, laid him in his hammock, close to the very sill
of the door of death. How he wasted and wasted away in those few
long-lingering days, till there seemed but little left of him but his
frame and tattooing. But as all else in him thinned, and his
cheek-bones grew sharper, his eyes, nevertheless, seemed growing fuller
and fuller; they became of a strange softness of lustre; and mildly but
deeply looked out at you there from his sickness, a wondrous testimony
to that immortal health in him which could not die, or be weakened. And
like circles on the water, which, as they grow fainter, expand; so his
eyes seemed rounding and rounding, like the rings of Eternity. An awe
that cannot be named would steal over you as you sat by the side of
this waning savage, and saw as strange things in his face, as any
beheld who were bystanders when Zoroaster died. For whatever is truly
wondrous and fearful in man, never yet was put into words or books. And
the drawing near of Death, which alike levels all, alike impresses all
with a last revelation, which only an author from the dead could
adequately tell. So that—let us say it again—no dying Chaldee or Greek
had higher and holier thoughts than those, whose mysterious shades you
saw creeping over the face of poor Queequeg, as he quietly lay in his
swaying hammock, and the rolling sea seemed gently rocking him to his
final rest, and the ocean’s invisible flood-tide lifted him higher and
higher towards his destined heaven.

Not a man of the crew but gave him up; and, as for Queequeg himself,
what he thought of his case was forcibly shown by a curious favour he
asked. He called one to him in the grey morning watch, when the day was
just breaking, and taking his hand, said that while in Nantucket he had
chanced to see certain little canoes of dark wood, like the rich
war-wood of his native isle; and upon inquiry, he had learned that all
whalemen who died in Nantucket, were laid in those same dark canoes,
and that the fancy of being so laid had much pleased him; for it was
not unlike the custom of his own race, who, after embalming a dead
warrior, stretched him out in his canoe, and so left him to be floated
away to the starry archipelagoes; for not only do they believe that the
stars are isles, but that far beyond all visible horizons, their own
mild, uncontinented seas, interflow with the blue heavens; and so form
the white breakers of the milky way. He added, that he shuddered at the
thought of being buried in his hammock, according to the usual
sea-custom, tossed like something vile to the death-devouring sharks.
No: he desired a canoe like those of Nantucket, all the more congenial
to him, being a whaleman, that like a whale-boat these coffin-canoes
were without a keel; though that involved but uncertain steering, and
much lee-way adown the dim ages.

Now, when this strange circumstance was made known aft, the carpenter
was at once commanded to do Queequeg’s bidding, whatever it might
include. There was some heathenish, coffin-coloured old lumber aboard,
which, upon a long previous voyage, had been cut from the aboriginal
groves of the Lackaday islands, and from these dark planks the coffin
was recommended to be made. No sooner was the carpenter apprised of the
order, than taking his rule, he forthwith with all the indifferent
promptitude of his character, proceeded into the forecastle and took
Queequeg’s measure with great accuracy, regularly chalking Queequeg’s
person as he shifted the rule.

“Ah! poor fellow! he’ll have to die now,” ejaculated the Long Island
sailor.

Going to his vice-bench, the carpenter for convenience sake and general
reference, now transferringly measured on it the exact length the
coffin was to be, and then made the transfer permanent by cutting two
notches at its extremities. This done, he marshalled the planks and his
tools, and to work.

When the last nail was driven, and the lid duly planed and fitted, he
lightly shouldered the coffin and went forward with it, inquiring
whether they were ready for it yet in that direction.

Overhearing the indignant but half-humorous cries with which the people
on deck began to drive the coffin away, Queequeg, to every one’s
consternation, commanded that the thing should be instantly brought to
him, nor was there any denying him; seeing that, of all mortals, some
dying men are the most tyrannical; and certainly, since they will
shortly trouble us so little for evermore, the poor fellows ought to be
indulged.

Leaning over in his hammock, Queequeg long regarded the coffin with an
attentive eye. He then called for his harpoon, had the wooden stock
drawn from it, and then had the iron part placed in the coffin along
with one of the paddles of his boat. All by his own request, also,
biscuits were then ranged round the sides within: a flask of fresh
water was placed at the head, and a small bag of woody earth scraped up
in the hold at the foot; and a piece of sail-cloth being rolled up for
a pillow, Queequeg now entreated to be lifted into his final bed, that
he might make trial of its comforts, if any it had. He lay without
moving a few minutes, then told one to go to his bag and bring out his
little god, Yojo. Then crossing his arms on his breast with Yojo
between, he called for the coffin lid (hatch he called it) to be placed
over him. The head part turned over with a leather hinge, and there lay
Queequeg in his coffin with little but his composed countenance in
view. “Rarmai” (it will do; it is easy), he murmured at last, and
signed to be replaced in his hammock.

But ere this was done, Pip, who had been slily hovering near by all
this while, drew nigh to him where he lay, and with soft sobbings, took
him by the hand; in the other, holding his tambourine.

“Poor rover! will ye never have done with all this weary roving? where
go ye now? But if the currents carry ye to those sweet Antilles where
the beaches are only beat with water-lilies, will ye do one little
errand for me? Seek out one Pip, who’s now been missing long: I think
he’s in those far Antilles. If ye find him, then comfort him; for he
must be very sad; for look! he’s left his tambourine behind;—I found
it. Rig-a-dig, dig, dig! Now, Queequeg, die; and I’ll beat ye your
dying march.”

“I have heard,” murmured Starbuck, gazing down the scuttle, “that in
violent fevers, men, all ignorance, have talked in ancient tongues; and
that when the mystery is probed, it turns out always that in their
wholly forgotten childhood those ancient tongues had been really spoken
in their hearing by some lofty scholars. So, to my fond faith, poor
Pip, in this strange sweetness of his lunacy, brings heavenly vouchers
of all our heavenly homes. Where learned he that, but there?—Hark! he
speaks again: but more wildly now.”

“Form two and two! Let’s make a General of him! Ho, where’s his
harpoon? Lay it across here.—Rig-a-dig, dig, dig! huzza! Oh for a game
cock now to sit upon his head and crow! Queequeg dies game!—mind ye
that; Queequeg dies game!—take ye good heed of that; Queequeg dies
game! I say; game, game, game! but base little Pip, he died a coward;
died all a’shiver;—out upon Pip! Hark ye; if ye find Pip, tell all the
Antilles he’s a runaway; a coward, a coward, a coward! Tell them he
jumped from a whale-boat! I’d never beat my tambourine over base Pip,
and hail him General, if he were once more dying here. No, no! shame
upon all cowards—shame upon them! Let ’em go drown like Pip, that
jumped from a whale-boat. Shame! shame!”

During all this, Queequeg lay with closed eyes, as if in a dream. Pip
was led away, and the sick man was replaced in his hammock.

But now that he had apparently made every preparation for death; now
that his coffin was proved a good fit, Queequeg suddenly rallied; soon
there seemed no need of the carpenter’s box: and thereupon, when some
expressed their delighted surprise, he, in substance, said, that the
cause of his sudden convalescence was this;—at a critical moment, he
had just recalled a little duty ashore, which he was leaving undone;
and therefore had changed his mind about dying: he could not die yet,
he averred. They asked him, then, whether to live or die was a matter
of his own sovereign will and pleasure. He answered, certainly. In a
word, it was Queequeg’s conceit, that if a man made up his mind to
live, mere sickness could not kill him: nothing but a whale, or a gale,
or some violent, ungovernable, unintelligent destroyer of that sort.

Now, there is this noteworthy difference between savage and civilized;
that while a sick, civilized man may be six months convalescing,
generally speaking, a sick savage is almost half-well again in a day.
So, in good time my Queequeg gained strength; and at length after
sitting on the windlass for a few indolent days (but eating with a
vigorous appetite) he suddenly leaped to his feet, threw out his arms
and legs, gave himself a good stretching, yawned a little bit, and then
springing into the head of his hoisted boat, and poising a harpoon,
pronounced himself fit for a fight.

With a wild whimsiness, he now used his coffin for a sea-chest; and
emptying into it his canvas bag of clothes, set them in order there.
Many spare hours he spent, in carving the lid with all manner of
grotesque figures and drawings; and it seemed that hereby he was
striving, in his rude way, to copy parts of the twisted tattooing on
his body. And this tattooing had been the work of a departed prophet
and seer of his island, who, by those hieroglyphic marks, had written
out on his body a complete theory of the heavens and the earth, and a
mystical treatise on the art of attaining truth; so that Queequeg in
his own proper person was a riddle to unfold; a wondrous work in one
volume; but whose mysteries not even himself could read, though his own
live heart beat against them; and these mysteries were therefore
destined in the end to moulder away with the living parchment whereon
they were inscribed, and so be unsolved to the last. And this thought
it must have been which suggested to Ahab that wild exclamation of his,
when one morning turning away from surveying poor Queequeg—“Oh,
devilish tantalization of the gods!”


CHAPTER 111. The Pacific.

When gliding by the Bashee isles we emerged at last upon the great
South Sea; were it not for other things, I could have greeted my dear
Pacific with uncounted thanks, for now the long supplication of my
youth was answered; that serene ocean rolled eastwards from me a
thousand leagues of blue.

There is, one knows not what sweet mystery about this sea, whose gently
awful stirrings seem to speak of some hidden soul beneath; like those
fabled undulations of the Ephesian sod over the buried Evangelist St.
John. And meet it is, that over these sea-pastures, wide-rolling watery
prairies and Potters’ Fields of all four continents, the waves should
rise and fall, and ebb and flow unceasingly; for here, millions of
mixed shades and shadows, drowned dreams, somnambulisms, reveries; all
that we call lives and souls, lie dreaming, dreaming, still; tossing
like slumberers in their beds; the ever-rolling waves but made so by
their restlessness.

To any meditative Magian rover, this serene Pacific, once beheld, must
ever after be the sea of his adoption. It rolls the midmost waters of
the world, the Indian ocean and Atlantic being but its arms. The same
waves wash the moles of the new-built Californian towns, but yesterday
planted by the recentest race of men, and lave the faded but still
gorgeous skirts of Asiatic lands, older than Abraham; while all between
float milky-ways of coral isles, and low-lying, endless, unknown
Archipelagoes, and impenetrable Japans. Thus this mysterious, divine
Pacific zones the world’s whole bulk about; makes all coasts one bay to
it; seems the tide-beating heart of earth. Lifted by those eternal
swells, you needs must own the seductive god, bowing your head to Pan.

But few thoughts of Pan stirred Ahab’s brain, as standing like an iron
statue at his accustomed place beside the mizen rigging, with one
nostril he unthinkingly snuffed the sugary musk from the Bashee isles
(in whose sweet woods mild lovers must be walking), and with the other
consciously inhaled the salt breath of the new found sea; that sea in
which the hated White Whale must even then be swimming. Launched at
length upon these almost final waters, and gliding towards the Japanese
cruising-ground, the old man’s purpose intensified itself. His firm
lips met like the lips of a vice; the Delta of his forehead’s veins
swelled like overladen brooks; in his very sleep, his ringing cry ran
through the vaulted hull, “Stern all! the White Whale spouts thick
blood!”


CHAPTER 112. The Blacksmith.

Availing himself of the mild, summer-cool weather that now reigned in
these latitudes, and in preparation for the peculiarly active pursuits
shortly to be anticipated, Perth, the begrimed, blistered old
blacksmith, had not removed his portable forge to the hold again, after
concluding his contributory work for Ahab’s leg, but still retained it
on deck, fast lashed to ringbolts by the foremast; being now almost
incessantly invoked by the headsmen, and harpooneers, and bowsmen to do
some little job for them; altering, or repairing, or new shaping their
various weapons and boat furniture. Often he would be surrounded by an
eager circle, all waiting to be served; holding boat-spades,
pike-heads, harpoons, and lances, and jealously watching his every
sooty movement, as he toiled. Nevertheless, this old man’s was a
patient hammer wielded by a patient arm. No murmur, no impatience, no
petulance did come from him. Silent, slow, and solemn; bowing over
still further his chronically broken back, he toiled away, as if toil
were life itself, and the heavy beating of his hammer the heavy beating
of his heart. And so it was.—Most miserable!

A peculiar walk in this old man, a certain slight but painful appearing
yawing in his gait, had at an early period of the voyage excited the
curiosity of the mariners. And to the importunity of their persisted
questionings he had finally given in; and so it came to pass that every
one now knew the shameful story of his wretched fate.

Belated, and not innocently, one bitter winter’s midnight, on the road
running between two country towns, the blacksmith half-stupidly felt
the deadly numbness stealing over him, and sought refuge in a leaning,
dilapidated barn. The issue was, the loss of the extremities of both
feet. Out of this revelation, part by part, at last came out the four
acts of the gladness, and the one long, and as yet uncatastrophied
fifth act of the grief of his life’s drama.

He was an old man, who, at the age of nearly sixty, had postponedly
encountered that thing in sorrow’s technicals called ruin. He had been
an artisan of famed excellence, and with plenty to do; owned a house
and garden; embraced a youthful, daughter-like, loving wife, and three
blithe, ruddy children; every Sunday went to a cheerful-looking church,
planted in a grove. But one night, under cover of darkness, and further
concealed in a most cunning disguisement, a desperate burglar slid into
his happy home, and robbed them all of everything. And darker yet to
tell, the blacksmith himself did ignorantly conduct this burglar into
his family’s heart. It was the Bottle Conjuror! Upon the opening of
that fatal cork, forth flew the fiend, and shrivelled up his home. Now,
for prudent, most wise, and economic reasons, the blacksmith’s shop was
in the basement of his dwelling, but with a separate entrance to it; so
that always had the young and loving healthy wife listened with no
unhappy nervousness, but with vigorous pleasure, to the stout ringing
of her young-armed old husband’s hammer; whose reverberations, muffled
by passing through the floors and walls, came up to her, not unsweetly,
in her nursery; and so, to stout Labor’s iron lullaby, the blacksmith’s
infants were rocked to slumber.

Oh, woe on woe! Oh, Death, why canst thou not sometimes be timely?
Hadst thou taken this old blacksmith to thyself ere his full ruin came
upon him, then had the young widow had a delicious grief, and her
orphans a truly venerable, legendary sire to dream of in their after
years; and all of them a care-killing competency. But Death plucked
down some virtuous elder brother, on whose whistling daily toil solely
hung the responsibilities of some other family, and left the worse than
useless old man standing, till the hideous rot of life should make him
easier to harvest.

Why tell the whole? The blows of the basement hammer every day grew
more and more between; and each blow every day grew fainter than the
last; the wife sat frozen at the window, with tearless eyes,
glitteringly gazing into the weeping faces of her children; the bellows
fell; the forge choked up with cinders; the house was sold; the mother
dived down into the long church-yard grass; her children twice followed
her thither; and the houseless, familyless old man staggered off a
vagabond in crape; his every woe unreverenced; his grey head a scorn to
flaxen curls!

Death seems the only desirable sequel for a career like this; but Death
is only a launching into the region of the strange Untried; it is but
the first salutation to the possibilities of the immense Remote, the
Wild, the Watery, the Unshored; therefore, to the death-longing eyes of
such men, who still have left in them some interior compunctions
against suicide, does the all-contributed and all-receptive ocean
alluringly spread forth his whole plain of unimaginable, taking
terrors, and wonderful, new-life adventures; and from the hearts of
infinite Pacifics, the thousand mermaids sing to them—“Come hither,
broken-hearted; here is another life without the guilt of intermediate
death; here are wonders supernatural, without dying for them. Come
hither! bury thyself in a life which, to your now equally abhorred and
abhorring, landed world, is more oblivious than death. Come hither! put
up _thy_ gravestone, too, within the churchyard, and come hither, till
we marry thee!”

Hearkening to these voices, East and West, by early sunrise, and by
fall of eve, the blacksmith’s soul responded, Aye, I come! And so Perth
went a-whaling.


CHAPTER 113. The Forge.

With matted beard, and swathed in a bristling shark-skin apron, about
mid-day, Perth was standing between his forge and anvil, the latter
placed upon an iron-wood log, with one hand holding a pike-head in the
coals, and with the other at his forge’s lungs, when Captain Ahab came
along, carrying in his hand a small rusty-looking leathern bag. While
yet a little distance from the forge, moody Ahab paused; till at last,
Perth, withdrawing his iron from the fire, began hammering it upon the
anvil—the red mass sending off the sparks in thick hovering flights,
some of which flew close to Ahab.

“Are these thy Mother Carey’s chickens, Perth? they are always flying
in thy wake; birds of good omen, too, but not to all;—look here, they
burn; but thou—thou liv’st among them without a scorch.”

“Because I am scorched all over, Captain Ahab,” answered Perth, resting
for a moment on his hammer; “I am past scorching; not easily can’st
thou scorch a scar.”

“Well, well; no more. Thy shrunk voice sounds too calmly, sanely woeful
to me. In no Paradise myself, I am impatient of all misery in others
that is not mad. Thou should’st go mad, blacksmith; say, why dost thou
not go mad? How can’st thou endure without being mad? Do the heavens
yet hate thee, that thou can’st not go mad?—What wert thou making
there?”

“Welding an old pike-head, sir; there were seams and dents in it.”

“And can’st thou make it all smooth again, blacksmith, after such hard
usage as it had?”

“I think so, sir.”

“And I suppose thou can’st smoothe almost any seams and dents; never
mind how hard the metal, blacksmith?”

“Aye, sir, I think I can; all seams and dents but one.”

“Look ye here, then,” cried Ahab, passionately advancing, and leaning
with both hands on Perth’s shoulders; “look ye here—_here_—can ye
smoothe out a seam like this, blacksmith,” sweeping one hand across his
ribbed brow; “if thou could’st, blacksmith, glad enough would I lay my
head upon thy anvil, and feel thy heaviest hammer between my eyes.
Answer! Can’st thou smoothe this seam?”

“Oh! that is the one, sir! Said I not all seams and dents but one?”

“Aye, blacksmith, it is the one; aye, man, it is unsmoothable; for
though thou only see’st it here in my flesh, it has worked down into
the bone of my skull—_that_ is all wrinkles! But, away with child’s
play; no more gaffs and pikes to-day. Look ye here!” jingling the
leathern bag, as if it were full of gold coins. “I, too, want a harpoon
made; one that a thousand yoke of fiends could not part, Perth;
something that will stick in a whale like his own fin-bone. There’s the
stuff,” flinging the pouch upon the anvil. “Look ye, blacksmith, these
are the gathered nail-stubbs of the steel shoes of racing horses.”

“Horse-shoe stubbs, sir? Why, Captain Ahab, thou hast here, then, the
best and stubbornest stuff we blacksmiths ever work.”

“I know it, old man; these stubbs will weld together like glue from the
melted bones of murderers. Quick! forge me the harpoon. And forge me
first, twelve rods for its shank; then wind, and twist, and hammer
these twelve together like the yarns and strands of a tow-line. Quick!
I’ll blow the fire.”

When at last the twelve rods were made, Ahab tried them, one by one, by
spiralling them, with his own hand, round a long, heavy iron bolt. “A
flaw!” rejecting the last one. “Work that over again, Perth.”

This done, Perth was about to begin welding the twelve into one, when
Ahab stayed his hand, and said he would weld his own iron. As, then,
with regular, gasping hems, he hammered on the anvil, Perth passing to
him the glowing rods, one after the other, and the hard pressed forge
shooting up its intense straight flame, the Parsee passed silently, and
bowing over his head towards the fire, seemed invoking some curse or
some blessing on the toil. But, as Ahab looked up, he slid aside.

“What’s that bunch of lucifers dodging about there for?” muttered
Stubb, looking on from the forecastle. “That Parsee smells fire like a
fusee; and smells of it himself, like a hot musket’s powder-pan.”

At last the shank, in one complete rod, received its final heat; and as
Perth, to temper it, plunged it all hissing into the cask of water near
by, the scalding steam shot up into Ahab’s bent face.

“Would’st thou brand me, Perth?” wincing for a moment with the pain;
“have I been but forging my own branding-iron, then?”

“Pray God, not that; yet I fear something, Captain Ahab. Is not this
harpoon for the White Whale?”

“For the white fiend! But now for the barbs; thou must make them
thyself, man. Here are my razors—the best of steel; here, and make the
barbs sharp as the needle-sleet of the Icy Sea.”

For a moment, the old blacksmith eyed the razors as though he would
fain not use them.

“Take them, man, I have no need for them; for I now neither shave, sup,
nor pray till—but here—to work!”

Fashioned at last into an arrowy shape, and welded by Perth to the
shank, the steel soon pointed the end of the iron; and as the
blacksmith was about giving the barbs their final heat, prior to
tempering them, he cried to Ahab to place the water-cask near.

“No, no—no water for that; I want it of the true death-temper. Ahoy,
there! Tashtego, Queequeg, Daggoo! What say ye, pagans! Will ye give me
as much blood as will cover this barb?” holding it high up. A cluster
of dark nods replied, Yes. Three punctures were made in the heathen
flesh, and the White Whale’s barbs were then tempered.

“Ego non baptizo te in nomine patris, sed in nomine diaboli!”
deliriously howled Ahab, as the malignant iron scorchingly devoured the
baptismal blood.

Now, mustering the spare poles from below, and selecting one of
hickory, with the bark still investing it, Ahab fitted the end to the
socket of the iron. A coil of new tow-line was then unwound, and some
fathoms of it taken to the windlass, and stretched to a great tension.
Pressing his foot upon it, till the rope hummed like a harp-string,
then eagerly bending over it, and seeing no strandings, Ahab exclaimed,
“Good! and now for the seizings.”

At one extremity the rope was unstranded, and the separate spread yarns
were all braided and woven round the socket of the harpoon; the pole
was then driven hard up into the socket; from the lower end the rope
was traced half-way along the pole’s length, and firmly secured so,
with intertwistings of twine. This done, pole, iron, and rope—like the
Three Fates—remained inseparable, and Ahab moodily stalked away with
the weapon; the sound of his ivory leg, and the sound of the hickory
pole, both hollowly ringing along every plank. But ere he entered his
cabin, light, unnatural, half-bantering, yet most piteous sound was
heard. Oh, Pip! thy wretched laugh, thy idle but unresting eye; all thy
strange mummeries not unmeaningly blended with the black tragedy of the
melancholy ship, and mocked it!


CHAPTER 114. The Gilder.

Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising
ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery. Often, in mild,
pleasant weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and twenty hours on
the stretch, they were engaged in the boats, steadily pulling, or
sailing, or paddling after the whales, or for an interlude of sixty or
seventy minutes calmly awaiting their uprising; though with but small
success for their pains.

At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow
heaving swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so
sociably mixing with the soft waves themselves, that like hearth-stone
cats they purr against the gunwale; these are the times of dreamy
quietude, when beholding the tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the
ocean’s skin, one forgets the tiger heart that pants beneath it; and
would not willingly remember, that this velvet paw but conceals a
remorseless fang.

These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a
certain filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he
regards it as so much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing
only the tops of her masts, seems struggling forward, not through high
rolling waves, but through the tall grass of a rolling prairie: as when
the western emigrants’ horses only show their erected ears, while their
hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing verdure.

The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these
there steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied
children lie sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when
the flowers of the woods are plucked. And all this mixes with your most
mystic mood; so that fact and fancy, half-way meeting, interpenetrate,
and form one seamless whole.

Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as
temporary an effect on Ahab. But if these secret golden keys did seem
to open in him his own secret golden treasuries, yet did his breath
upon them prove but tarnishing.

Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
ye,—though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy life,—in ye,
men yet may roll, like young horses in new morning clover; and for some
few fleeting moments, feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them.
Would to God these blessed calms would last. But the mingled, mingling
threads of life are woven by warp and woof: calms crossed by storms, a
storm for every calm. There is no steady unretracing progress in this
life; we do not advance through fixed gradations, and at the last one
pause:—through infancy’s unconscious spell, boyhood’s thoughtless
faith, adolescence’ doubt (the common doom), then scepticism, then
disbelief, resting at last in manhood’s pondering repose of If. But
once gone through, we trace the round again; and are infants, boys, and
men, and Ifs eternally. Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor
no more? In what rapt ether sails the world, of which the weariest will
never weary? Where is the foundling’s father hidden? Our souls are like
those orphans whose unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of
our paternity lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.

And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat’s side into that
same golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:—

“Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride’s
eye!—Tell me not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping
cannibal ways. Let faith oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look deep
down and do believe.”

And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same
golden light:—

“I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths that
he has always been jolly!”


CHAPTER 115. The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.

And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing down
before the wind, some few weeks after Ahab’s harpoon had been welded.

It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her
last cask of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in
glad holiday apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously,
sailing round among the widely-separated ships on the ground, previous
to pointing her prow for home.

The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red
bunting at their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended,
bottom down; and hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long
lower jaw of the last whale they had slain. Signals, ensigns, and jacks
of all colours were flying from her rigging, on every side. Sideways
lashed in each of her three basketed tops were two barrels of sperm;
above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you saw slender breakers of
the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck was a brazen
lamp.

As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most
surprising success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising in
the same seas numerous other vessels had gone entire months without
securing a single fish. Not only had barrels of beef and bread been
given away to make room for the far more valuable sperm, but additional
supplemental casks had been bartered for, from the ships she had met;
and these were stowed along the deck, and in the captain’s and
officers’ state-rooms. Even the cabin table itself had been knocked
into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the broad head of an
oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a centrepiece. In the
forecastle, the sailors had actually caulked and pitched their chests,
and filled them; it was humorously added, that the cook had clapped a
head on his largest boiler, and filled it; that the steward had plugged
his spare coffee-pot and filled it; that the harpooneers had headed the
sockets of their irons and filled them; that indeed everything was
filled with sperm, except the captain’s pantaloons pockets, and those
he reserved to thrust his hands into, in self-complacent testimony of
his entire satisfaction.

As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the
barbarian sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and drawing
still nearer, a crowd of her men were seen standing round her huge
try-pots, which, covered with the parchment-like _poke_ or stomach skin
of the black fish, gave forth a loud roar to every stroke of the
clenched hands of the crew. On the quarter-deck, the mates and
harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had eloped with
them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an ornamented boat,
firmly secured aloft between the foremast and mainmast, three Long
Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of whale ivory, were
presiding over the hilarious jig. Meanwhile, others of the ship’s
company were tumultuously busy at the masonry of the try-works, from
which the huge pots had been removed. You would have almost thought
they were pulling down the cursed Bastille, such wild cries they
raised, as the now useless brick and mortar were being hurled into the
sea.

Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the
ship’s elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was
full before him, and seemed merely contrived for his own individual
diversion.

And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black,
with a stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other’s
wakes—one all jubilations for things passed, the other all forebodings
as to things to come—their two captains in themselves impersonated the
whole striking contrast of the scene.

“Come aboard, come aboard!” cried the gay Bachelor’s commander, lifting
a glass and a bottle in the air.

“Hast seen the White Whale?” gritted Ahab in reply.

“No; only heard of him; but don’t believe in him at all,” said the
other good-humoredly. “Come aboard!”

“Thou art too damned jolly. Sail on. Hast lost any men?”

“Not enough to speak of—two islanders, that’s all;—but come aboard, old
hearty, come along. I’ll soon take that black from your brow. Come
along, will ye (merry’s the play); a full ship and homeward-bound.”

“How wondrous familiar is a fool!” muttered Ahab; then aloud, “Thou art
a full ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me an
empty ship, and outward-bound. So go thy ways, and I will mine. Forward
there! Set all sail, and keep her to the wind!”

And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the other
stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted; the crew
of the Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards the
receding Bachelor; but the Bachelor’s men never heeding their gaze for
the lively revelry they were in. And as Ahab, leaning over the
taffrail, eyed the homeward-bound craft, he took from his pocket a
small vial of sand, and then looking from the ship to the vial, seemed
thereby bringing two remote associations together, for that vial was
filled with Nantucket soundings.


CHAPTER 116. The Dying Whale.

Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune’s favourites
sail close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the
rushing breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out. So seemed
it with the Pequod. For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor,
whales were seen and four were slain; and one of them by Ahab.

It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the
crimson fight were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky,
sun and whale both stilly died together; then, such a sweetness and
such plaintiveness, such inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy
air, that it almost seemed as if far over from the deep green convent
valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish land-breeze, wantonly turned
sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these vesper hymns.

Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had sterned
off from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings from the
now tranquil boat. For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm
whales dying—the turning sunwards of the head, and so expiring—that
strange spectacle, beheld of such a placid evening, somehow to Ahab
conveyed a wondrousness unknown before.

“He turns and turns him to it,—how slowly, but how steadfastly, his
homage-rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions. He too
worships fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the sun!—Oh
that these too-favouring eyes should see these too-favouring sights.
Look! here, far water-locked; beyond all hum of human weal or woe; in
these most candid and impartial seas; where to traditions no rocks
furnish tablets; where for long Chinese ages, the billows have still
rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as stars that shine upon the
Niger’s unknown source; here, too, life dies sunwards full of faith;
but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the corpse, and it
heads some other way.

“Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast builded
thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas;
thou art an infidel, thou queen, and too truly speakest to me in the
wide-slaughtering Typhoon, and the hushed burial of its after calm. Nor
has this thy whale sunwards turned his dying head, and then gone round
again, without a lesson to me.

“Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power! Oh, high aspiring,
rainbowed jet!—that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain! In
vain, oh whale, dost thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening
sun, that only calls forth life, but gives it not again. Yet dost thou,
darker half, rock me with a prouder, if a darker faith. All thy
unnamable imminglings float beneath me here; I am buoyed by breaths of
once living things, exhaled as air, but water now.

“Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild
fowl finds his only rest. Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea; though
hill and valley mothered me, ye billows are my foster-brothers!”


CHAPTER 117. The Whale Watch.

The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to
windward; one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern. These
last three were brought alongside ere nightfall; but the windward one
could not be reached till morning; and the boat that had killed it lay
by its side all night; and that boat was Ahab’s.

The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale’s spout-hole; and
the lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering glare upon
the black, glossy back, and far out upon the midnight waves, which
gently chafed the whale’s broad flank, like soft surf upon a beach.

Ahab and all his boat’s crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who
crouching in the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played
round the whale, and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails. A
sound like the moaning in squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven
ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering through the air.

Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and
hooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a
flooded world. “I have dreamed it again,” said he.

“Of the hearses? Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor
coffin can be thine?”

“And who are hearsed that die on the sea?”

“But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two
hearses must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by
mortal hands; and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in
America.”

“Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:—a hearse and its plumes
floating over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers. Ha! Such a
sight we shall not soon see.”

“Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man.”

“And what was that saying about thyself?”

“Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot.”

“And when thou art so gone before—if that ever befall—then ere I can
follow, thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?—Was it not so?
Well, then, did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot! I have here two
pledges that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and survive it.”

“Take another pledge, old man,” said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted up
like fire-flies in the gloom—“Hemp only can kill thee.”

“The gallows, ye mean.—I am immortal then, on land and on sea,” cried
Ahab, with a laugh of derision;—“Immortal on land and on sea!”

Both were silent again, as one man. The grey dawn came on, and the
slumbering crew arose from the boat’s bottom, and ere noon the dead
whale was brought to the ship.


CHAPTER 118. The Quadrant.

The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab,
coming from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman would
ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners quickly run to
the braces, and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed
on the nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to point the ship’s
prow for the equator. In good time the order came. It was hard upon
high noon; and Ahab, seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat, was
about taking his wonted daily observation of the sun to determine his
latitude.

Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of
effulgences. That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing
focus of the glassy ocean’s immeasurable burning-glass. The sky looks
lacquered; clouds there are none; the horizon floats; and this
nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the insufferable splendors of
God’s throne. Well that Ahab’s quadrant was furnished with coloured
glasses, through which to take sight of that solar fire. So, swinging
his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in that
posture for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun
should gain its precise meridian. Meantime while his whole attention
was absorbed, the Parsee was kneeling beneath him on the ship’s deck,
and with face thrown up like Ahab’s, was eyeing the same sun with him;
only the lids of his eyes half hooded their orbs, and his wild face was
subdued to an earthly passionlessness. At length the desired
observation was taken; and with his pencil upon his ivory leg, Ahab
soon calculated what his latitude must be at that precise instant. Then
falling into a moment’s revery, he again looked up towards the sun and
murmured to himself: “Thou sea-mark! thou high and mighty Pilot! thou
tellest me truly where I _am_—but canst thou cast the least hint where
I _shall_ be? Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is
this moment living? Where is Moby Dick? This instant thou must be
eyeing him. These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now
beholding him; aye, and into the eye that is even now equally beholding
the objects on the unknown, thither side of thee, thou sun!”

Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its
numerous cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered:
“Foolish toy! babies’ plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores,
and Captains; the world brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but
what after all canst thou do, but tell the poor, pitiful point, where
thou thyself happenest to be on this wide planet, and the hand that
holds thee: no! not one jot more! Thou canst not tell where one drop of
water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and yet with thy
impotence thou insultest the sun! Science! Curse thee, thou vain toy;
and cursed be all the things that cast man’s eyes aloft to that heaven,
whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes are even now
scorched with thy light, O sun! Level by nature to this earth’s horizon
are the glances of man’s eyes; not shot from the crown of his head, as
if God had meant him to gaze on his firmament. Curse thee, thou
quadrant!” dashing it to the deck, “no longer will I guide my earthly
way by thee; the level ship’s compass, and the level dead-reckoning, by
log and by line; _these_ shall conduct me, and show me my place on the
sea. Aye,” lighting from the boat to the deck, “thus I trample on thee,
thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high; thus I split and
destroy thee!”

As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and
dead feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a
fatalistic despair that seemed meant for himself—these passed over the
mute, motionless Parsee’s face. Unobserved he rose and glided away;
while, awestruck by the aspect of their commander, the seamen clustered
together on the forecastle, till Ahab, troubledly pacing the deck,
shouted out—“To the braces! Up helm!—square in!”

In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled upon
her heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her
long, ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one
sufficient steed.

Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod’s
tumultuous way, and Ahab’s also, as he went lurching along the deck.

“I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full
of its tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down,
down, to dumbest dust. Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of
thine, what will at length remain but one little heap of ashes!”

“Aye,” cried Stubb, “but sea-coal ashes—mind ye that, Mr.
Starbuck—sea-coal, not your common charcoal. Well, well; I heard Ahab
mutter, ‘Here some one thrusts these cards into these old hands of
mine; swears that I must play them, and no others.’ And damn me, Ahab,
but thou actest right; live in the game, and die in it!”


CHAPTER 119. The Candles.

Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal
crouches in spiced groves of ceaseless verdure. Skies the most
effulgent but basket the deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows
tornadoes that never swept tame northern lands. So, too, it is, that in
these resplendent Japanese seas the mariner encounters the direst of
all storms, the Typhoon. It will sometimes burst from out that
cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town.

Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and
bare-poled was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly
ahead. When darkness came on, sky and sea roared and split with the
thunder, and blazed with the lightning, that showed the disabled masts
fluttering here and there with the rags which the first fury of the
tempest had left for its after sport.

Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at
every flash of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional
disaster might have befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb
and Flask were directing the men in the higher hoisting and firmer
lashing of the boats. But all their pains seemed naught. Though lifted
to the very top of the cranes, the windward quarter boat (Ahab’s) did
not escape. A great rolling sea, dashing high up against the reeling
ship’s high teetering side, stove in the boat’s bottom at the stern,
and left it again, all dripping through like a sieve.

“Bad work, bad work! Mr. Starbuck,” said Stubb, regarding the wreck,
“but the sea will have its way. Stubb, for one, can’t fight it. You
see, Mr. Starbuck, a wave has such a great long start before it leaps,
all round the world it runs, and then comes the spring! But as for me,
all the start I have to meet it, is just across the deck here. But
never mind; it’s all in fun: so the old song says;”—(_sings_.)


  Oh! jolly is the gale, And a joker is the whale, A’ flourishin’ his
  tail,— Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the
  Ocean, oh!

  The scud all a flyin’, That’s his flip only foamin’; When he stirs in
  the spicin’,— Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad,
  is the Ocean, oh!

  Thunder splits the ships, But he only smacks his lips, A tastin’ of
  this flip,— Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad,
  is the Ocean, oh!



“Avast Stubb,” cried Starbuck, “let the Typhoon sing, and strike his
harp here in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold
thy peace.”

“But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a coward;
and I sing to keep up my spirits. And I tell you what it is, Mr.
Starbuck, there’s no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my
throat. And when that’s done, ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a
wind-up.”

“Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own.”

“What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else, never
mind how foolish?”

“Here!” cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing his
hand towards the weather bow, “markest thou not that the gale comes
from the eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick? the
very course he swung to this day noon? now mark his boat there; where
is that stove? In the stern-sheets, man; where he is wont to stand—his
stand-point is stove, man! Now jump overboard, and sing away, if thou
must!

“I don’t half understand ye: what’s in the wind?”

“Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to
Nantucket,” soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb’s
question. “The gale that now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn it
into a fair wind that will drive us towards home. Yonder, to windward,
all is blackness of doom; but to leeward, homeward—I see it lightens up
there; but not with the lightning.”

At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness, following
the flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at the same
instant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.

“Who’s there?”

“Old Thunder!” said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his
pivot-hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed
lances of fire.

Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off
the perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea some
ships carry to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the water. But
as this conductor must descend to considerable depth, that its end may
avoid all contact with the hull; and as moreover, if kept constantly
towing there, it would be liable to many mishaps, besides interfering
not a little with some of the rigging, and more or less impeding the
vessel’s way in the water; because of all this, the lower parts of a
ship’s lightning-rods are not always overboard; but are generally made
in long slender links, so as to be the more readily hauled up into the
chains outside, or thrown down into the sea, as occasion may require.

“The rods! the rods!” cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished
to vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting
flambeaux, to light Ahab to his post. “Are they overboard? drop them
over, fore and aft. Quick!”

“Avast!” cried Ahab; “let’s have fair play here, though we be the
weaker side. Yet I’ll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and
Andes, that all the world may be secured; but out on privileges! Let
them be, sir.”

“Look aloft!” cried Starbuck. “The corpusants! the corpusants!”

All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each
tri-pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each of
the three tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air, like
three gigantic wax tapers before an altar.

“Blast the boat! let it go!” cried Stubb at this instant, as a swashing
sea heaved up under his own little craft, so that its gunwale violently
jammed his hand, as he was passing a lashing. “Blast it!”—but slipping
backward on the deck, his uplifted eyes caught the flames; and
immediately shifting his tone he cried—“The corpusants have mercy on us
all!”

To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance of
the calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate curses
from the topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a seething
sea; but in all my voyagings, seldom have I heard a common oath when
God’s burning finger has been laid on the ship; when His “Mene, Mene,
Tekel Upharsin” has been woven into the shrouds and the cordage.

While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from the
enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle, all
their eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away
constellation of stars. Relieved against the ghostly light, the
gigantic jet negro, Daggoo, loomed up to thrice his real stature, and
seemed the black cloud from which the thunder had come. The parted
mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white teeth, which strangely
gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants; while lit up by
the preternatural light, Queequeg’s tattooing burned like Satanic blue
flames on his body.

The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once more
the Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall. A moment
or two passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against some one.
It was Stubb. “What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy cry; it was not
the same in the song.”

“No, no, it wasn’t; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I
hope they will, still. But do they only have mercy on long faces?—have
they no bowels for a laugh? And look ye, Mr. Starbuck—but it’s too dark
to look. Hear me, then: I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign
of good luck; for those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be
chock a’ block with sperm-oil, d’ye see; and so, all that sperm will
work up into the masts, like sap in a tree. Yes, our three masts will
yet be as three spermaceti candles—that’s the good promise we saw.”

At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb’s face slowly beginning
to glimmer into sight. Glancing upwards, he cried: “See! see!” and once
more the high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled
supernaturalness in their pallor.

“The corpusants have mercy on us all,” cried Stubb, again.

At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the flame,
the Parsee was kneeling in Ahab’s front, but with his head bowed away
from him; while near by, from the arched and overhanging rigging, where
they had just been engaged securing a spar, a number of the seamen,
arrested by the glare, now cohered together, and hung pendulous, like a
knot of numbed wasps from a drooping, orchard twig. In various
enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or stepping, or running
skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the deck; but all
their eyes upcast.

“Aye, aye, men!” cried Ahab. “Look up at it; mark it well; the white
flame but lights the way to the White Whale! Hand me those mainmast
links there; I would fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against
it; blood against fire! So.”

Then turning—the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his foot
upon the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right arm,
he stood erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.

“Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian
once did worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that
to this hour I bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and I
now know that thy right worship is defiance. To neither love nor
reverence wilt thou be kind; and e’en for hate thou canst but kill; and
all are killed. No fearless fool now fronts thee. I own thy speechless,
placeless power; but to the last gasp of my earthquake life will
dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in me. In the midst of
the personified impersonal, a personality stands here. Though but a
point at best; whencesoe’er I came; wheresoe’er I go; yet while I
earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and feels her royal
rights. But war is pain, and hate is woe. Come in thy lowest form of
love, and I will kneel and kiss thee; but at thy highest, come as mere
supernal power; and though thou launchest navies of full-freighted
worlds, there’s that in here that still remains indifferent. Oh, thou
clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest me, and like a true child of
fire, I breathe it back to thee.”

[_Sudden, repeated flashes of lightning; the nine flames leap
lengthwise to thrice their previous height; Ahab, with the rest, closes
his eyes, his right hand pressed hard upon them._]

“I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so? Nor was it wrung
from me; nor do I now drop these links. Thou canst blind; but I can
then grope. Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes. Take the
homage of these poor eyes, and shutter-hands. I would not take it. The
lightning flashes through my skull; mine eye-balls ache and ache; my
whole beaten brain seems as beheaded, and rolling on some stunning
ground. Oh, oh! Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to thee. Light though
thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness leaping out of
light, leaping out of thee! The javelins cease; open eyes; see, or not?
There burn the flames! Oh, thou magnanimous! now I do glory in my
genealogy. But thou art but my fiery father; my sweet mother, I know
not. Oh, cruel! what hast thou done with her? There lies my puzzle; but
thine is greater. Thou knowest not how came ye, hence callest thyself
unbegotten; certainly knowest not thy beginning, hence callest thyself
unbegun. I know that of me, which thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou
omnipotent. There is some unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear
spirit, to whom all thy eternity is but time, all thy creativeness
mechanical. Through thee, thy flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly
see it. Oh, thou foundling fire, thou hermit immemorial, thou too hast
thy incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated grief. Here again with
haughty agony, I read my sire. Leap! leap up, and lick the sky! I leap
with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee; defyingly
I worship thee!”

“The boat! the boat!” cried Starbuck, “look at thy boat, old man!”

Ahab’s harpoon, the one forged at Perth’s fire, remained firmly lashed
in its conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his whale-boat’s
bow; but the sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather
sheath to drop off; and from the keen steel barb there now came a
levelled flame of pale, forked fire. As the silent harpoon burned there
like a serpent’s tongue, Starbuck grasped Ahab by the arm—“God, God is
against thee, old man; forbear! ’tis an ill voyage! ill begun, ill
continued; let me square the yards, while we may, old man, and make a
fair wind of it homewards, to go on a better voyage than this.”

Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
braces—though not a sail was left aloft. For the moment all the aghast
mate’s thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous cry. But
dashing the rattling lightning links to the deck, and snatching the
burning harpoon, Ahab waved it like a torch among them; swearing to
transfix with it the first sailor that but cast loose a rope’s end.
Petrified by his aspect, and still more shrinking from the fiery dart
that he held, the men fell back in dismay, and Ahab again spoke:—

“All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and
heart, soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound. And that ye
may know to what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow out
the last fear!” And with one blast of his breath he extinguished the
flame.

As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood of
some lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render it
so much the more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for
thunderbolts; so at those last words of Ahab’s many of the mariners did
run from him in a terror of dismay.


CHAPTER 120. The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.

_Ahab standing by the helm. Starbuck approaching him._

“We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir. The band is working
loose and the lee lift is half-stranded. Shall I strike it, sir?”

“Strike nothing; lash it. If I had sky-sail poles, I’d sway them up
now.”

“Sir!—in God’s name!—sir?”

“Well.”

“The anchors are working, sir. Shall I get them inboard?”

“Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything. The wind rises,
but it has not got up to my table-lands yet. Quick, and see to it.—By
masts and keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper of some
coasting smack. Send down my main-top-sail yard! Ho, gluepots! Loftiest
trucks were made for wildest winds, and this brain-truck of mine now
sails amid the cloud-scud. Shall I strike that? Oh, none but cowards
send down their brain-trucks in tempest time. What a hooroosh aloft
there! I would e’en take it for sublime, did I not know that the colic
is a noisy malady. Oh, take medicine, take medicine!”


CHAPTER 121. Midnight.—The Forecastle Bulwarks.

_Stubb and Flask mounted on them, and passing additional lashings over
the anchors there hanging._

“No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but
you will never pound into me what you were just now saying. And how
long ago is it since you said the very contrary? Didn’t you once say
that whatever ship Ahab sails in, that ship should pay something extra
on its insurance policy, just as though it were loaded with powder
barrels aft and boxes of lucifers forward? Stop, now; didn’t you say
so?”

“Well, suppose I did? What then? I’ve part changed my flesh since that
time, why not my mind? Besides, supposing we _are_ loaded with powder
barrels aft and lucifers forward; how the devil could the lucifers get
afire in this drenching spray here? Why, my little man, you have pretty
red hair, but you couldn’t get afire now. Shake yourself; you’re
Aquarius, or the water-bearer, Flask; might fill pitchers at your coat
collar. Don’t you see, then, that for these extra risks the Marine
Insurance companies have extra guarantees? Here are hydrants, Flask.
But hark, again, and I’ll answer ye the other thing. First take your
leg off from the crown of the anchor here, though, so I can pass the
rope; now listen. What’s the mighty difference between holding a mast’s
lightning-rod in the storm, and standing close by a mast that hasn’t
got any lightning-rod at all in a storm? Don’t you see, you
timber-head, that no harm can come to the holder of the rod, unless the
mast is first struck? What are you talking about, then? Not one ship in
a hundred carries rods, and Ahab,—aye, man, and all of us,—were in no
more danger then, in my poor opinion, than all the crews in ten
thousand ships now sailing the seas. Why, you King-Post, you, I suppose
you would have every man in the world go about with a small
lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat, like a militia
officer’s skewered feather, and trailing behind like his sash. Why
don’t ye be sensible, Flask? it’s easy to be sensible; why don’t ye,
then? any man with half an eye can be sensible.”

“I don’t know that, Stubb. You sometimes find it rather hard.”

“Yes, when a fellow’s soaked through, it’s hard to be sensible, that’s
a fact. And I am about drenched with this spray. Never mind; catch the
turn there, and pass it. Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors
now as if they were never going to be used again. Tying these two
anchors here, Flask, seems like tying a man’s hands behind him. And
what big generous hands they are, to be sure. These are your iron
fists, hey? What a hold they have, too! I wonder, Flask, whether the
world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings with an uncommon long
cable, though. There, hammer that knot down, and we’ve done. So; next
to touching land, lighting on deck is the most satisfactory. I say,
just wring out my jacket skirts, will ye? Thank ye. They laugh at
long-togs so, Flask; but seems to me, a long tailed coat ought always
to be worn in all storms afloat. The tails tapering down that way,
serve to carry off the water, d’ye see. Same with cocked hats; the
cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask. No more monkey-jackets and
tarpaulins for me; I must mount a swallow-tail, and drive down a
beaver; so. Halloa! whew! there goes my tarpaulin overboard; Lord,
Lord, that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly!
This is a nasty night, lad.”


CHAPTER 122. Midnight Aloft.—Thunder and Lightning.

_The main-top-sail yard_.—_Tashtego passing new lashings around it_.

“Um, um, um. Stop that thunder! Plenty too much thunder up here. What’s
the use of thunder? Um, um, um. We don’t want thunder; we want rum;
give us a glass of rum. Um, um, um!”


CHAPTER 123. The Musket.

During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the Pequod’s
jaw-bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by
its spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had been attached
to it—for they were slack—because some play to the tiller was
indispensable.

In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock
to the blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the
compasses, at intervals, go round and round. It was thus with the
Pequod’s; at almost every shock the helmsman had not failed to notice
the whirling velocity with which they revolved upon the cards; it is a
sight that hardly anyone can behold without some sort of unwonted
emotion.

Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through the
strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb—one engaged forward and the
other aft—the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails
were cut adrift from the spars, and went eddying away to leeward, like
the feathers of an albatross, which sometimes are cast to the winds
when that storm-tossed bird is on the wing.

The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a
storm-trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through
the water with some precision again; and the course—for the present,
East-south-east—which he was to steer, if practicable, was once more
given to the helmsman. For during the violence of the gale, he had only
steered according to its vicissitudes. But as he was now bringing the
ship as near her course as possible, watching the compass meanwhile,
lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round astern; aye, the foul
breeze became fair!

Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of “_Ho! the fair
wind! oh-ye-ho, cheerly men!_” the crew singing for joy, that so
promising an event should so soon have falsified the evil portents
preceding it.

In compliance with the standing order of his commander—to report
immediately, and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided
change in the affairs of the deck,—Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the
yards to the breeze—however reluctantly and gloomily,—than he
mechanically went below to apprise Captain Ahab of the circumstance.

Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a
moment. The cabin lamp—taking long swings this way and that—was burning
fitfully, and casting fitful shadows upon the old man’s bolted door,—a
thin one, with fixed blinds inserted, in place of upper panels. The
isolated subterraneousness of the cabin made a certain humming silence
to reign there, though it was hooped round by all the roar of the
elements. The loaded muskets in the rack were shiningly revealed, as
they stood upright against the forward bulkhead. Starbuck was an
honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck’s heart, at that instant when
he saw the muskets, there strangely evolved an evil thought; but so
blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he
hardly knew it for itself.

“He would have shot me once,” he murmured, “yes, there’s the very
musket that he pointed at me;—that one with the studded stock; let me
touch it—lift it. Strange, that I, who have handled so many deadly
lances, strange, that I should shake so now. Loaded? I must see. Aye,
aye; and powder in the pan;—that’s not good. Best spill it?—wait. I’ll
cure myself of this. I’ll hold the musket boldly while I think.—I come
to report a fair wind to him. But how fair? Fair for death and
doom,—_that’s_ fair for Moby Dick. It’s a fair wind that’s only fair
for that accursed fish.—The very tube he pointed at me!—the very one;
_this_ one—I hold it here; he would have killed me with the very thing
I handle now.—Aye and he would fain kill all his crew. Does he not say
he will not strike his spars to any gale? Has he not dashed his
heavenly quadrant? and in these same perilous seas, gropes he not his
way by mere dead reckoning of the error-abounding log? and in this very
Typhoon, did he not swear that he would have no lightning-rods? But
shall this crazed old man be tamely suffered to drag a whole ship’s
company down to doom with him?—Yes, it would make him the wilful
murderer of thirty men and more, if this ship come to any deadly harm;
and come to deadly harm, my soul swears this ship will, if Ahab have
his way. If, then, he were this instant—put aside, that crime would not
be his. Ha! is he muttering in his sleep? Yes, just there,—in there,
he’s sleeping. Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again. I
can’t withstand thee, then, old man. Not reasoning; not remonstrance;
not entreaty wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest. Flat
obedience to thy own flat commands, this is all thou breathest. Aye,
and say’st the men have vow’d thy vow; say’st all of us are Ahabs.
Great God forbid!—But is there no other way? no lawful way?—Make him a
prisoner to be taken home? What! hope to wrest this old man’s living
power from his own living hands? Only a fool would try it. Say he were
pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers; chained down to
ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more hideous than a caged
tiger, then. I could not endure the sight; could not possibly fly his
howlings; all comfort, sleep itself, inestimable reason would leave me
on the long intolerable voyage. What, then, remains? The land is
hundreds of leagues away, and locked Japan the nearest. I stand alone
here upon an open sea, with two oceans and a whole continent between me
and law.—Aye, aye, ’tis so.—Is heaven a murderer when its lightning
strikes a would-be murderer in his bed, tindering sheets and skin
together?—And would I be a murderer, then, if”—and slowly, stealthily,
and half sideways looking, he placed the loaded musket’s end against
the door.

“On this level, Ahab’s hammock swings within; his head this way. A
touch, and Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.—Oh
Mary! Mary!—boy! boy! boy!—But if I wake thee not to death, old man,
who can tell to what unsounded deeps Starbuck’s body this day week may
sink, with all the crew! Great God, where art Thou? Shall I? shall
I?—The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the fore and main topsails
are reefed and set; she heads her course.”

“Stern all! Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!”

Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man’s
tormented sleep, as if Starbuck’s voice had caused the long dumb dream
to speak.

The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard’s arm against the panel;
Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the door, he
placed the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.

“He’s too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and tell
him. I must see to the deck here. Thou know’st what to say.”


CHAPTER 124. The Needle.

Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of
mighty bulk, and striving in the Pequod’s gurgling track, pushed her on
like giants’ palms outspread. The strong, unstaggering breeze abounded
so, that sky and air seemed vast outbellying sails; the whole world
boomed before the wind. Muffled in the full morning light, the
invisible sun was only known by the spread intensity of his place;
where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks. Emblazonings, as of crowned
Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over everything. The sea was as a
crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps with light and heat.

Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every time
the tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he turned to
eye the bright sun’s rays produced ahead; and when she profoundly
settled by the stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun’s rearward
place, and how the same yellow rays were blending with his undeviating
wake.

“Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot
of the sun. Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun to
ye! Yoke on the further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the sea!”

But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards
the helm, huskily demanding how the ship was heading.

“East-sou-east, sir,” said the frightened steersman.

“Thou liest!” smiting him with his clenched fist. “Heading East at this
hour in the morning, and the sun astern?”

Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then
observed by Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its very
blinding palpableness must have been the cause.

Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one glimpse
of the compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment he almost
seemed to stagger. Standing behind him Starbuck looked, and lo! the two
compasses pointed East, and the Pequod was as infallibly going West.

But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the
old man with a rigid laugh exclaimed, “I have it! It has happened
before. Mr. Starbuck, last night’s thunder turned our compasses—that’s
all. Thou hast before now heard of such a thing, I take it.”

“Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir,” said the pale mate,
gloomily.

Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more than
one case occurred to ships in violent storms. The magnetic energy, as
developed in the mariner’s needle, is, as all know, essentially one
with the electricity beheld in heaven; hence it is not to be much
marvelled at, that such things should be. Instances where the lightning
has actually struck the vessel, so as to smite down some of the spars
and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at times been still more
fatal; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated, so that the before
magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife’s knitting needle.
But in either case, the needle never again, of itself, recovers the
original virtue thus marred or lost; and if the binnacle compasses be
affected, the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship;
even were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson.

Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the transpointed
compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended hand, now took
the precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the needles were
exactly inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship’s course to be
changed accordingly. The yards were hard up; and once more the Pequod
thrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for the supposed fair
one had only been juggling her.

Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said
nothing, but quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and
Flask—who in some small degree seemed then to be sharing his
feelings—likewise unmurmuringly acquiesced. As for the men, though some
of them lowly rumbled, their fear of Ahab was greater than their fear
of Fate. But as ever before, the pagan harpooneers remained almost
wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only with a certain
magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible Ahab’s.

For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries. But
chancing to slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper
sight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.

“Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun’s pilot! yesterday I wrecked
thee, and to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me. So, so. But
Ahab is lord over the level loadstone yet. Mr. Starbuck—a lance without
a pole; a top-maul, and the smallest of the sail-maker’s needles.
Quick!”

Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about
to do, were certain prudential motives, whose object might have been to
revive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill, in a
matter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses. Besides, the old
man well knew that to steer by transpointed needles, though clumsily
practicable, was not a thing to be passed over by superstitious
sailors, without some shudderings and evil portents.

“Men,” said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed him
the things he had demanded, “my men, the thunder turned old Ahab’s
needles; but out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own,
that will point as true as any.”

Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as
this was said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic
might follow. But Starbuck looked away.

With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the
lance, and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade
him hold it upright, without its touching the deck. Then, with the
maul, after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he
placed the blunted needle endwise on the top of it, and less strongly
hammered that, several times, the mate still holding the rod as before.
Then going through some small strange motions with it—whether
indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely intended to
augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain—he called for linen thread;
and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two reversed needles there,
and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle, over one of
the compass-cards. At first, the steel went round and round, quivering
and vibrating at either end; but at last it settled to its place, when
Ahab, who had been intently watching for this result, stepped frankly
back from the binnacle, and pointing his stretched arm towards it,
exclaimed,—“Look ye, for yourselves, if Ahab be not lord of the level
loadstone! The sun is East, and that compass swears it!”

One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes could
persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they slunk
away.

In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his
fatal pride.


CHAPTER 125. The Log and Line.

While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the log
and line had but very seldom been in use. Owing to a confident reliance
upon other means of determining the vessel’s place, some merchantmen,
and many whalemen, especially when cruising, wholly neglect to heave
the log; though at the same time, and frequently more for form’s sake
than anything else, regularly putting down upon the customary slate the
course steered by the ship, as well as the presumed average rate of
progression every hour. It had been thus with the Pequod. The wooden
reel and angular log attached hung, long untouched, just beneath the
railing of the after bulwarks. Rains and spray had damped it; sun and
wind had warped it; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that
hung so idly. But heedless of all this, his mood seized Ahab, as he
happened to glance upon the reel, not many hours after the magnet
scene, and he remembered how his quadrant was no more, and recalled his
frantic oath about the level log and line. The ship was sailing
plungingly; astern the billows rolled in riots.

“Forward, there! Heave the log!”

Two seamen came. The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman.
“Take the reel, one of ye, I’ll heave.”

They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship’s lee side, where the
deck, with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping into
the creamy, sidelong-rushing sea.

The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting
handle-ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved, so
stood with the angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced to
him.

Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty
turns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old
Manxman, who was intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to
speak.

“Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have
spoiled it.”

“’Twill hold, old gentleman. Long heat and wet, have they spoiled thee?
Thou seem’st to hold. Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee; not thou it.”

“I hold the spool, sir. But just as my captain says. With these grey
hairs of mine ’tis not worth while disputing, ’specially with a
superior, who’ll ne’er confess.”

“What’s that? There now’s a patched professor in Queen Nature’s
granite-founded College; but methinks he’s too subservient. Where wert
thou born?”

“In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir.”

“Excellent! Thou’st hit the world by that.”

“I know not, sir, but I was born there.”

“In the Isle of Man, hey? Well, the other way, it’s good. Here’s a man
from Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of Man;
which is sucked in—by what? Up with the reel! The dead, blind wall
butts all inquiring heads at last. Up with it! So.”

The log was heaved. The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long
dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to whirl. In
turn, jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows, the towing
resistance of the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely.

“Hold hard!”

Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the
tugging log was gone.

“I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad
sea parts the log-line. But Ahab can mend all. Haul in here, Tahitian;
reel up, Manxman. And look ye, let the carpenter make another log, and
mend thou the line. See to it.”

“There he goes now; to him nothing’s happened; but to me, the skewer
seems loosening out of the middle of the world. Haul in, haul in,
Tahitian! These lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken, and
dragging slow. Ha, Pip? come to help; eh, Pip?”

“Pip? whom call ye Pip? Pip jumped from the whale-boat. Pip’s missing.
Let’s see now if ye haven’t fished him up here, fisherman. It drags
hard; I guess he’s holding on. Jerk him, Tahiti! Jerk him off; we haul
in no cowards here. Ho! there’s his arm just breaking water. A hatchet!
a hatchet! cut it off—we haul in no cowards here. Captain Ahab! sir,
sir! here’s Pip, trying to get on board again.”

“Peace, thou crazy loon,” cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm.
“Away from the quarter-deck!”

“The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser,” muttered Ahab, advancing.
“Hands off from that holiness! Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?

“Astern there, sir, astern! Lo! lo!”

“And who art thou, boy? I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of
thy eyes. Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls to
sieve through! Who art thou, boy?”

“Bell-boy, sir; ship’s-crier; ding, dong, ding! Pip! Pip! Pip! One
hundred pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high—looks
cowardly—quickest known by that! Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip the
coward?”

“There can be no hearts above the snow-line. Oh, ye frozen heavens!
look down here. Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned
him, ye creative libertines. Here, boy; Ahab’s cabin shall be Pip’s
home henceforth, while Ahab lives. Thou touchest my inmost centre, boy;
thou art tied to me by cords woven of my heart-strings. Come, let’s
down.”

“What’s this? here’s velvet shark-skin,” intently gazing at Ahab’s
hand, and feeling it. “Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing
as this, perhaps he had ne’er been lost! This seems to me, sir, as a
man-rope; something that weak souls may hold by. Oh, sir, let old Perth
now come and rivet these two hands together; the black one with the
white, for I will not let this go.”

“Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse
horrors than are here. Come, then, to my cabin. Lo! ye believers in
gods all goodness, and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient gods
oblivious of suffering man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing not
what he does, yet full of the sweet things of love and gratitude. Come!
I feel prouder leading thee by thy black hand, than though I grasped an
Emperor’s!”

“There go two daft ones now,” muttered the old Manxman. “One daft with
strength, the other daft with weakness. But here’s the end of the
rotten line—all dripping, too. Mend it, eh? I think we had best have a
new line altogether. I’ll see Mr. Stubb about it.”


CHAPTER 126. The Life-Buoy.

Steering now south-eastward by Ahab’s levelled steel, and her progress
solely determined by Ahab’s level log and line; the Pequod held on her
path towards the Equator. Making so long a passage through such
unfrequented waters, descrying no ships, and ere long, sideways
impelled by unvarying trade winds, over waves monotonously mild; all
these seemed the strange calm things preluding some riotous and
desperate scene.

At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of the
Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before
the dawn, was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch—then
headed by Flask—was startled by a cry so plaintively wild and
unearthly—like half-articulated wailings of the ghosts of all Herod’s
murdered Innocents—that one and all, they started from their reveries,
and for the space of some moments stood, or sat, or leaned all
transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while that wild
cry remained within hearing. The Christian or civilized part of the
crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan harpooneers
remained unappalled. Yet the grey Manxman—the oldest mariner of
all—declared that the wild thrilling sounds that were heard, were the
voices of newly drowned men in the sea.

Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when he
came to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not
unaccompanied with hinted dark meanings. He hollowly laughed, and thus
explained the wonder.

Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great
numbers of seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or
some dams that had lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and
kept company with her, crying and sobbing with their human sort of
wail. But this only the more affected some of them, because most
mariners cherish a very superstitious feeling about seals, arising not
only from their peculiar tones when in distress, but also from the
human look of their round heads and semi-intelligent faces, seen
peeringly uprising from the water alongside. In the sea, under certain
circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for men.

But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning. At
sun-rise this man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore;
and whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for
sailors sometimes go aloft in a transition state), whether it was thus
with the man, there is now no telling; but, be that as it may, he had
not been long at his perch, when a cry was heard—a cry and a
rushing—and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in the air; and
looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue of the
sea.

The life-buoy—a long slender cask—was dropped from the stern, where it
always hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to seize it,
and the sun having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken, so that it
slowly filled, and that parched wood also filled at its every pore; and
the studded iron-bound cask followed the sailor to the bottom, as if to
yield him his pillow, though in sooth but a hard one.

And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out
for the White Whale, on the White Whale’s own peculiar ground; that man
was swallowed up in the deep. But few, perhaps, thought of that at the
time. Indeed, in some sort, they were not grieved at this event, at
least as a portent; for they regarded it, not as a foreshadowing of
evil in the future, but as the fulfilment of an evil already presaged.
They declared that now they knew the reason of those wild shrieks they
had heard the night before. But again the old Manxman said nay.

The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to see
to it; but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and as in
the feverish eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the
voyage, all hands were impatient of any toil but what was directly
connected with its final end, whatever that might prove to be;
therefore, they were going to leave the ship’s stern unprovided with a
buoy, when by certain strange signs and inuendoes Queequeg hinted a
hint concerning his coffin.

“A life-buoy of a coffin!” cried Starbuck, starting.

“Rather queer, that, I should say,” said Stubb.

“It will make a good enough one,” said Flask, “the carpenter here can
arrange it easily.”

“Bring it up; there’s nothing else for it,” said Starbuck, after a
melancholy pause. “Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so—the coffin,
I mean. Dost thou hear me? Rig it.”

“And shall I nail down the lid, sir?” moving his hand as with a hammer.

“Aye.”

“And shall I caulk the seams, sir?” moving his hand as with a
caulking-iron.

“Aye.”

“And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?” moving his hand
as with a pitch-pot.

“Away! what possesses thee to this? Make a life-buoy of the coffin, and
no more.—Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me.”

“He goes off in a huff. The whole he can endure; at the parts he
baulks. Now I don’t like this. I make a leg for Captain Ahab, and he
wears it like a gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and he
won’t put his head into it. Are all my pains to go for nothing with
that coffin? And now I’m ordered to make a life-buoy of it. It’s like
turning an old coat; going to bring the flesh on the other side now. I
don’t like this cobbling sort of business—I don’t like it at all; it’s
undignified; it’s not my place. Let tinkers’ brats do tinkerings; we
are their betters. I like to take in hand none but clean, virgin,
fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that regularly begins at
the beginning, and is at the middle when midway, and comes to an end at
the conclusion; not a cobbler’s job, that’s at an end in the middle,
and at the beginning at the end. It’s the old woman’s tricks to be
giving cobbling jobs. Lord! what an affection all old women have for
tinkers. I know an old woman of sixty-five who ran away with a
bald-headed young tinker once. And that’s the reason I never would work
for lonely widow old women ashore, when I kept my job-shop in the
Vineyard; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads to run
off with me. But heigh-ho! there are no caps at sea but snow-caps. Let
me see. Nail down the lid; caulk the seams; pay over the same with
pitch; batten them down tight, and hang it with the snap-spring over
the ship’s stern. Were ever such things done before with a coffin? Some
superstitious old carpenters, now, would be tied up in the rigging, ere
they would do the job. But I’m made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I
don’t budge. Cruppered with a coffin! Sailing about with a grave-yard
tray! But never mind. We workers in woods make bridal-bedsteads and
card-tables, as well as coffins and hearses. We work by the month, or
by the job, or by the profit; not for us to ask the why and wherefore
of our work, unless it be too confounded cobbling, and then we stash it
if we can. Hem! I’ll do the job, now, tenderly. I’ll have me—let’s
see—how many in the ship’s company, all told? But I’ve forgotten. Any
way, I’ll have me thirty separate, Turk’s-headed life-lines, each three
feet long hanging all round to the coffin. Then, if the hull go down,
there’ll be thirty lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, a sight
not seen very often beneath the sun! Come hammer, caulking-iron,
pitch-pot, and marling-spike! Let’s to it.”


CHAPTER 127. The Deck.

_The coffin laid upon two line-tubs, between the vice-bench and the
open hatchway; the Carpenter caulking its seams; the string of twisted
oakum slowly unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of
his frock.—Ahab comes slowly from the cabin-gangway, and hears Pip
following him._

“Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently. He goes! Not this hand
complies with my humor more genially than that boy.—Middle aisle of a
church! What’s here?”

“Life-buoy, sir. Mr. Starbuck’s orders. Oh, look, sir! Beware the
hatchway!”

“Thank ye, man. Thy coffin lies handy to the vault.”

“Sir? The hatchway? oh! So it does, sir, so it does.”

“Art not thou the leg-maker? Look, did not this stump come from thy
shop?”

“I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?”

“Well enough. But art thou not also the undertaker?”

“Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but
they’ve set me now to turning it into something else.”

“Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and the
next day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of those
same coffins? Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as much of a
jack-of-all-trades.”

“But I do not mean anything, sir. I do as I do.”

“The gods again. Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a
coffin? The Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the
craters for volcanoes; and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade in
hand. Dost thou never?”

“Sing, sir? Do I sing? Oh, I’m indifferent enough, sir, for that; but
the reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there
was none in his spade, sir. But the caulking mallet is full of it. Hark
to it.”

“Aye, and that’s because the lid there’s a sounding-board; and what in
all things makes the sounding-board is this—there’s naught beneath. And
yet, a coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same, Carpenter.
Hast thou ever helped carry a bier, and heard the coffin knock against
the churchyard gate, going in?

“Faith, sir, I’ve——”

“Faith? What’s that?”

“Why, faith, sir, it’s only a sort of exclamation-like—that’s all,
sir.”

“Um, um; go on.”

“I was about to say, sir, that——”

“Art thou a silk-worm? Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself?
Look at thy bosom! Despatch! and get these traps out of sight.”

“He goes aft. That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot
latitudes. I’ve heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the
Gallipagos, is cut by the Equator right in the middle. Seems to me some
sort of Equator cuts yon old man, too, right in his middle. He’s always
under the Line—fiery hot, I tell ye! He’s looking this way—come, oakum;
quick. Here we go again. This wooden mallet is the cork, and I’m the
professor of musical glasses—tap, tap!”

(_Ahab to himself_.)

“There’s a sight! There’s a sound! The greyheaded woodpecker tapping
the hollow tree! Blind and dumb might well be envied now. See! that
thing rests on two line-tubs, full of tow-lines. A most malicious wag,
that fellow. Rat-tat! So man’s seconds tick! Oh! how immaterial are all
materials! What things real are there, but imponderable thoughts? Here
now’s the very dreaded symbol of grim death, by a mere hap, made the
expressive sign of the help and hope of most endangered life. A
life-buoy of a coffin! Does it go further? Can it be that in some
spiritual sense the coffin is, after all, but an immortality-preserver!
I’ll think of that. But no. So far gone am I in the dark side of earth,
that its other side, the theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain
twilight to me. Will ye never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed
sound? I go below; let me not see that thing here when I return again.
Now, then, Pip, we’ll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous
philosophies from thee! Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds
must empty into thee!”


CHAPTER 128. The Pequod Meets The Rachel.

Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly down
upon the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men. At the time
the Pequod was making good speed through the water; but as the
broad-winged windward stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful sails all
fell together as blank bladders that are burst, and all life fled from
the smitten hull.

“Bad news; she brings bad news,” muttered the old Manxman. But ere her
commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere he
could hopefully hail, Ahab’s voice was heard.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Aye, yesterday. Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?”

Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question;
and would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the stranger
captain himself, having stopped his vessel’s way, was seen descending
her side. A few keen pulls, and his boat-hook soon clinched the
Pequod’s main-chains, and he sprang to the deck. Immediately he was
recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew. But no formal salutation
was exchanged.

“Where was he?—not killed!—not killed!” cried Ahab, closely advancing.
“How was it?”

It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous,
while three of the stranger’s boats were engaged with a shoal of
whales, which had led them some four or five miles from the ship; and
while they were yet in swift chase to windward, the white hump and head
of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up out of the water, not very far to
leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat—a reserved one—had been
instantly lowered in chase. After a keen sail before the wind, this
fourth boat—the swiftest keeled of all—seemed to have succeeded in
fastening—at least, as well as the man at the mast-head could tell
anything about it. In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat;
and then a swift gleam of bubbling white water; and after that nothing
more; whence it was concluded that the stricken whale must have
indefinitely run away with his pursuers, as often happens. There was
some apprehension, but no positive alarm, as yet. The recall signals
were placed in the rigging; darkness came on; and forced to pick up her
three far to windward boats—ere going in quest of the fourth one in the
precisely opposite direction—the ship had not only been necessitated to
leave that boat to its fate till near midnight, but, for the time, to
increase her distance from it. But the rest of her crew being at last
safe aboard, she crowded all sail—stunsail on stunsail—after the
missing boat; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every
other man aloft on the look-out. But though when she had thus sailed a
sufficient distance to gain the presumed place of the absent ones when
last seen; though she then paused to lower her spare boats to pull all
around her; and not finding anything, had again dashed on; again
paused, and lowered her boats; and though she had thus continued doing
till daylight; yet not the least glimpse of the missing keel had been
seen.

The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his
object in boarding the Pequod. He desired that ship to unite with his
own in the search; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles
apart, on parallel lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as it were.

“I will wager something now,” whispered Stubb to Flask, “that some one
in that missing boat wore off that Captain’s best coat; mayhap, his
watch—he’s so cursed anxious to get it back. Who ever heard of two
pious whale-ships cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height
of the whaling season? See, Flask, only see how pale he looks—pale in
the very buttons of his eyes—look—it wasn’t the coat—it must have been
the—”

“My boy, my own boy is among them. For God’s sake—I beg, I
conjure”—here exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far had
but icily received his petition. “For eight-and-forty hours let me
charter your ship—I will gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for it—if
there be no other way—for eight-and-forty hours only—only that—you
must, oh, you must, and you _shall_ do this thing.”

“His son!” cried Stubb, “oh, it’s his son he’s lost! I take back the
coat and watch—what says Ahab? We must save that boy.”

“He’s drowned with the rest on ’em, last night,” said the old Manx
sailor standing behind them; “I heard; all of ye heard their spirits.”

Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the Rachel’s
the more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was one of the
Captain’s sons among the number of the missing boat’s crew; but among
the number of the other boat’s crews, at the same time, but on the
other hand, separated from the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the
chase, there had been still another son; as that for a time, the
wretched father was plunged to the bottom of the cruellest perplexity;
which was only solved for him by his chief mate’s instinctively
adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship in such emergencies,
that is, when placed between jeopardized but divided boats, always to
pick up the majority first. But the captain, for some unknown
constitutional reason, had refrained from mentioning all this, and not
till forced to it by Ahab’s iciness did he allude to his one yet
missing boy; a little lad, but twelve years old, whose father with the
earnest but unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer’s paternal love, had
thus early sought to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a
vocation almost immemorially the destiny of all his race. Nor does it
unfrequently occur, that Nantucket captains will send a son of such
tender age away from them, for a protracted three or four years’ voyage
in some other ship than their own; so that their first knowledge of a
whaleman’s career shall be unenervated by any chance display of a
father’s natural but untimely partiality, or undue apprehensiveness and
concern.

Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab;
and Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but without
the least quivering of his own.

“I will not go,” said the stranger, “till you say _aye_ to me. Do to me
as you would have me do to you in the like case. For _you_ too have a
boy, Captain Ahab—though but a child, and nestling safely at home now—a
child of your old age too—Yes, yes, you relent; I see it—run, run, men,
now, and stand by to square in the yards.”

“Avast,” cried Ahab—“touch not a rope-yarn”; then in a voice that
prolongingly moulded every word—“Captain Gardiner, I will not do it.
Even now I lose time. Good-bye, good-bye. God bless ye, man, and may I
forgive myself, but I must go. Mr. Starbuck, look at the binnacle
watch, and in three minutes from this present instant warn off all
strangers: then brace forward again, and let the ship sail as before.”

Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin,
leaving the strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter
rejection of his so earnest suit. But starting from his enchantment,
Gardiner silently hurried to the side; more fell than stepped into his
boat, and returned to his ship.

Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange vessel
was in view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot,
however small, on the sea. This way and that her yards were swung
round; starboard and larboard, she continued to tack; now she beat
against a head sea; and again it pushed her before it; while all the
while, her masts and yards were thickly clustered with men, as three
tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying among the boughs.

But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly
saw that this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without
comfort. She was Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were
not.


CHAPTER 129. The Cabin.

(_Ahab moving to go on deck; Pip catches him by the hand to follow._)

“Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now. The hour is
coming when Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have thee
by him. There is that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too curing to my
malady. Like cures like; and for this hunt, my malady becomes my most
desired health. Do thou abide below here, where they shall serve thee,
as if thou wert the captain. Aye, lad, thou shalt sit here in my own
screwed chair; another screw to it, thou must be.”

“No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for
your one lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I remain
a part of ye.”

“Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless
fidelity of man!—and a black! and crazy!—but methinks like-cures-like
applies to him too; he grows so sane again.”

“They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose
drowned bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living skin.
But I will never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him. Sir, I must go with
ye.”

“If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab’s purpose keels up in him.
I tell thee no; it cannot be.”

“Oh good master, master, master!

“Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad.
Listen, and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and still
know that I am there. And now I quit thee. Thy hand!—Met! True art
thou, lad, as the circumference to its centre. So: God for ever bless
thee; and if it come to that,—God for ever save thee, let what will
befall.”

(_Ahab goes; Pip steps one step forward._)

“Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,—but I’m alone. Now
were even poor Pip here I could endure it, but he’s missing. Pip! Pip!
Ding, dong, ding! Who’s seen Pip? He must be up here; let’s try the
door. What? neither lock, nor bolt, nor bar; and yet there’s no opening
it. It must be the spell; he told me to stay here: Aye, and told me
this screwed chair was mine. Here, then, I’ll seat me, against the
transom, in the ship’s full middle, all her keel and her three masts
before me. Here, our old sailors say, in their black seventy-fours
great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord it over rows of
captains and lieutenants. Ha! what’s this? epaulets! epaulets! the
epaulets all come crowding! Pass round the decanters; glad to see ye;
fill up, monsieurs! What an odd feeling, now, when a black boy’s host
to white men with gold lace upon their coats!—Monsieurs, have ye seen
one Pip?—a little negro lad, five feet high, hang-dog look, and
cowardly! Jumped from a whale-boat once;—seen him? No! Well then, fill
up again, captains, and let’s drink shame upon all cowards! I name no
names. Shame upon them! Put one foot upon the table. Shame upon all
cowards.—Hist! above there, I hear ivory—Oh, master! master! I am
indeed down-hearted when you walk over me. But here I’ll stay, though
this stern strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to
join me.”


CHAPTER 130. The Hat.

And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
preliminary cruise, Ahab,—all other whaling waters swept—seemed to have
chased his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securely there;
now, that he found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude
where his tormenting wound had been inflicted; now that a vessel had
been spoken which on the very day preceding had actually encountered
Moby Dick;—and now that all his successive meetings with various ships
contrastingly concurred to show the demoniac indifference with which
the white whale tore his hunters, whether sinning or sinned against;
now it was that there lurked a something in the old man’s eyes, which
it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see. As the unsetting
polar star, which through the livelong, arctic, six months’ night
sustains its piercing, steady, central gaze; so Ahab’s purpose now
fixedly gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew. It
domineered above them so, that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings,
fears, were fain to hide beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a
single spear or leaf.

In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural,
vanished. Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more
strove to check one. Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed
ground to finest dust, and powdered, for the time, in the clamped
mortar of Ahab’s iron soul. Like machines, they dumbly moved about the
deck, ever conscious that the old man’s despot eye was on them.

But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours; when
he thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have seen that
even as Ahab’s eyes so awed the crew’s, the inscrutable Parsee’s glance
awed his; or somehow, at least, in some wild way, at times affected it.
Such an added, gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah
now; such ceaseless shudderings shook him; that the men looked dubious
at him; half uncertain, as it seemed, whether indeed he were a mortal
substance, or else a tremulous shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen
being’s body. And that shadow was always hovering there. For not by
night, even, had Fedallah ever certainly been known to slumber, or go
below. He would stand still for hours: but never sat or leaned; his wan
but wondrous eyes did plainly say—We two watchmen never rest.

Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon the
deck, unless Ahab was before them; either standing in his pivot-hole,
or exactly pacing the planks between two undeviating limits,—the
main-mast and the mizen; or else they saw him standing in the
cabin-scuttle,—his living foot advanced upon the deck, as if to step;
his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that however motionless he
stood, however the days and nights were added on, that he had not swung
in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat, they could never
tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes were really closed at
times; or whether he was still intently scanning them; no matter,
though he stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch, and
the unheeded night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved
coat and hat. The clothes that the night had wet, the next day’s
sunshine dried upon him; and so, day after day, and night after night;
he went no more beneath the planks; whatever he wanted from the cabin
that thing he sent for.

He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,—breakfast and
dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which darkly
grew all gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over, which still
grow idly on at naked base, though perished in the upper verdure. But
though his whole life was now become one watch on deck; and though the
Parsee’s mystic watch was without intermission as his own; yet these
two never seemed to speak—one man to the other—unless at long intervals
some passing unmomentous matter made it necessary. Though such a potent
spell seemed secretly to join the twain; openly, and to the awe-struck
crew, they seemed pole-like asunder. If by day they chanced to speak
one word; by night, dumb men were both, so far as concerned the
slightest verbal interchange. At times, for longest hours, without a
single hail, they stood far parted in the starlight; Ahab in his
scuttle, the Parsee by the mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each
other; as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the
Parsee his abandoned substance.

And yet, somehow, did Ahab—in his own proper self, as daily, hourly,
and every instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,—Ahab
seemed an independent lord; the Parsee but his slave. Still again both
seemed yoked together, and an unseen tyrant driving them; the lean
shade siding the solid rib. For be this Parsee what he may, all rib and
keel was solid Ahab.

At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was heard
from aft,—“Man the mast-heads!”—and all through the day, till after
sunset and after twilight, the same voice every hour, at the striking
of the helmsman’s bell, was heard—“What d’ye see?—sharp! sharp!”

But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting the
children-seeking Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the monomaniac
old man seemed distrustful of his crew’s fidelity; at least, of nearly
all except the Pagan harpooneers; he seemed to doubt, even, whether
Stubb and Flask might not willingly overlook the sight he sought. But
if these suspicions were really his, he sagaciously refrained from
verbally expressing them, however his actions might seem to hint them.

“I will have the first sight of the whale myself,”—he said. “Aye! Ahab
must have the doubloon!” and with his own hands he rigged a nest of
basketed bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved
block, to secure to the main-mast head, he received the two ends of the
downward-reeved rope; and attaching one to his basket prepared a pin
for the other end, in order to fasten it at the rail. This done, with
that end yet in his hand and standing beside the pin, he looked round
upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other; pausing his glance long
upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning Fedallah; and then
settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate, said,—“Take the
rope, sir—I give it into thy hands, Starbuck.” Then arranging his
person in the basket, he gave the word for them to hoist him to his
perch, Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last; and
afterwards stood near it. And thus, with one hand clinging round the
royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad upon the sea for miles and miles,—ahead,
astern, this side, and that,—within the wide expanded circle commanded
at so great a height.

When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in
the rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea is
hoisted up to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under these
circumstances, its fastened end on deck is always given in strict
charge to some one man who has the special watch of it. Because in such
a wilderness of running rigging, whose various different relations
aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned by what is seen of them at
the deck; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are being every few
minutes cast down from the fastenings, it would be but a natural
fatality, if, unprovided with a constant watchman, the hoisted sailor
should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all
swooping to the sea. So Ahab’s proceedings in this matter were not
unusual; the only strange thing about them seemed to be, that Starbuck,
almost the one only man who had ever ventured to oppose him with
anything in the slightest degree approaching to decision—one of those
too, whose faithfulness on the look-out he had seemed to doubt
somewhat;—it was strange, that this was the very man he should select
for his watchman; freely giving his whole life into such an otherwise
distrusted person’s hands.

Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten
minutes; one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly
incommodiously close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these
latitudes; one of these birds came wheeling and screaming round his
head in a maze of untrackably swift circlings. Then it darted a
thousand feet straight up into the air; then spiralized downwards, and
went eddying again round his head.

But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed
not to mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have marked
it much, it being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost the least
heedful eye seemed to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every
sight.

“Your hat, your hat, sir!” suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who
being posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab, though
somewhat lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air dividing
them.

But already the sable wing was before the old man’s eyes; the long
hooked bill at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away with
his prize.

An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin’s head, removing his cap to replace
it, and thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin would be
king of Rome. But only by the replacing of the cap was that omen
accounted good. Ahab’s hat was never restored; the wild hawk flew on
and on with it; far in advance of the prow: and at last disappeared;
while from the point of that disappearance, a minute black spot was
dimly discerned, falling from that vast height into the sea.


CHAPTER 131. The Pequod Meets The Delight.

The intense Pequod sailed on; the rolling waves and days went by; the
life-buoy-coffin still lightly swung; and another ship, most miserably
misnamed the Delight, was descried. As she drew nigh, all eyes were
fixed upon her broad beams, called shears, which, in some
whaling-ships, cross the quarter-deck at the height of eight or nine
feet; serving to carry the spare, unrigged, or disabled boats.

Upon the stranger’s shears were beheld the shattered, white ribs, and
some few splintered planks, of what had once been a whale-boat; but you
now saw through this wreck, as plainly as you see through the peeled,
half-unhinged, and bleaching skeleton of a horse.

“Hast seen the White Whale?”

“Look!” replied the hollow-cheeked captain from his taffrail; and with
his trumpet he pointed to the wreck.

“Hast killed him?”

“The harpoon is not yet forged that ever will do that,” answered the
other, sadly glancing upon a rounded hammock on the deck, whose
gathered sides some noiseless sailors were busy in sewing together.

“Not forged!” and snatching Perth’s levelled iron from the crotch, Ahab
held it out, exclaiming—“Look ye, Nantucketer; here in this hand I hold
his death! Tempered in blood, and tempered by lightning are these
barbs; and I swear to temper them triply in that hot place behind the
fin, where the White Whale most feels his accursed life!”

“Then God keep thee, old man—see’st thou that”—pointing to the
hammock—“I bury but one of five stout men, who were alive only
yesterday; but were dead ere night. Only _that_ one I bury; the rest
were buried before they died; you sail upon their tomb.” Then turning
to his crew—“Are ye ready there? place the plank then on the rail, and
lift the body; so, then—Oh! God”—advancing towards the hammock with
uplifted hands—“may the resurrection and the life——”

“Brace forward! Up helm!” cried Ahab like lightning to his men.

But the suddenly started Pequod was not quick enough to escape the
sound of the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea; not
so quick, indeed, but that some of the flying bubbles might have
sprinkled her hull with their ghostly baptism.

As Ahab now glided from the dejected Delight, the strange life-buoy
hanging at the Pequod’s stern came into conspicuous relief.

“Ha! yonder! look yonder, men!” cried a foreboding voice in her wake.
“In vain, oh, ye strangers, ye fly our sad burial; ye but turn us your
taffrail to show us your coffin!”


CHAPTER 132. The Symphony.

It was a clear steel-blue day. The firmaments of air and sea were
hardly separable in that all-pervading azure; only, the pensive air was
transparently pure and soft, with a woman’s look, and the robust and
man-like sea heaved with long, strong, lingering swells, as Samson’s
chest in his sleep.

Hither, and thither, on high, glided the snow-white wings of small,
unspeckled birds; these were the gentle thoughts of the feminine air;
but to and fro in the deeps, far down in the bottomless blue, rushed
mighty leviathans, sword-fish, and sharks; and these were the strong,
troubled, murderous thinkings of the masculine sea.

But though thus contrasting within, the contrast was only in shades and
shadows without; those two seemed one; it was only the sex, as it were,
that distinguished them.

Aloft, like a royal czar and king, the sun seemed giving this gentle
air to this bold and rolling sea; even as bride to groom. And at the
girdling line of the horizon, a soft and tremulous motion—most seen
here at the equator—denoted the fond, throbbing trust, the loving
alarms, with which the poor bride gave her bosom away.

Tied up and twisted; gnarled and knotted with wrinkles; haggardly firm
and unyielding; his eyes glowing like coals, that still glow in the
ashes of ruin; untottering Ahab stood forth in the clearness of the
morn; lifting his splintered helmet of a brow to the fair girl’s
forehead of heaven.

Oh, immortal infancy, and innocency of the azure! Invisible winged
creatures that frolic all round us! Sweet childhood of air and sky! how
oblivious were ye of old Ahab’s close-coiled woe! But so have I seen
little Miriam and Martha, laughing-eyed elves, heedlessly gambol around
their old sire; sporting with the circle of singed locks which grew on
the marge of that burnt-out crater of his brain.

Slowly crossing the deck from the scuttle, Ahab leaned over the side
and watched how his shadow in the water sank and sank to his gaze, the
more and the more that he strove to pierce the profundity. But the
lovely aromas in that enchanted air did at last seem to dispel, for a
moment, the cankerous thing in his soul. That glad, happy air, that
winsome sky, did at last stroke and caress him; the step-mother world,
so long cruel—forbidding—now threw affectionate arms round his stubborn
neck, and did seem to joyously sob over him, as if over one, that
however wilful and erring, she could yet find it in her heart to save
and to bless. From beneath his slouched hat Ahab dropped a tear into
the sea; nor did all the Pacific contain such wealth as that one wee
drop.

Starbuck saw the old man; saw him, how he heavily leaned over the side;
and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the measureless sobbing
that stole out of the centre of the serenity around. Careful not to
touch him, or be noticed by him, he yet drew near to him, and stood
there.

Ahab turned.

“Starbuck!”

“Sir.”

“Oh, Starbuck! it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky. On such
a day—very much such a sweetness as this—I struck my first whale—a
boy-harpooneer of eighteen! Forty—forty—forty years ago!—ago! Forty
years of continual whaling! forty years of privation, and peril, and
storm-time! forty years on the pitiless sea! for forty years has Ahab
forsaken the peaceful land, for forty years to make war on the horrors
of the deep! Aye and yes, Starbuck, out of those forty years I have not
spent three ashore. When I think of this life I have led; the
desolation of solitude it has been; the masoned, walled-town of a
Captain’s exclusiveness, which admits but small entrance to any
sympathy from the green country without—oh, weariness! heaviness!
Guinea-coast slavery of solitary command!—when I think of all this;
only half-suspected, not so keenly known to me before—and how for forty
years I have fed upon dry salted fare—fit emblem of the dry nourishment
of my soil!—when the poorest landsman has had fresh fruit to his daily
hand, and broken the world’s fresh bread to my mouldy crusts—away,
whole oceans away, from that young girl-wife I wedded past fifty, and
sailed for Cape Horn the next day, leaving but one dent in my marriage
pillow—wife? wife?—rather a widow with her husband alive! Aye, I
widowed that poor girl when I married her, Starbuck; and then, the
madness, the frenzy, the boiling blood and the smoking brow, with
which, for a thousand lowerings old Ahab has furiously, foamingly
chased his prey—more a demon than a man!—aye, aye! what a forty years’
fool—fool—old fool, has old Ahab been! Why this strife of the chase?
why weary, and palsy the arm at the oar, and the iron, and the lance?
how the richer or better is Ahab now? Behold. Oh, Starbuck! is it not
hard, that with this weary load I bear, one poor leg should have been
snatched from under me? Here, brush this old hair aside; it blinds me,
that I seem to weep. Locks so grey did never grow but from out some
ashes! But do I look very old, so very, very old, Starbuck? I feel
deadly faint, bowed, and humped, as though I were Adam, staggering
beneath the piled centuries since Paradise. God! God! God!—crack my
heart!—stave my brain!—mockery! mockery! bitter, biting mockery of grey
hairs, have I lived enough joy to wear ye; and seem and feel thus
intolerably old? Close! stand close to me, Starbuck; let me look into a
human eye; it is better than to gaze into sea or sky; better than to
gaze upon God. By the green land; by the bright hearth-stone! this is
the magic glass, man; I see my wife and my child in thine eye. No, no;
stay on board, on board!—lower not when I do; when branded Ahab gives
chase to Moby Dick. That hazard shall not be thine. No, no! not with
the far away home I see in that eye!”

“Oh, my Captain! my Captain! noble soul! grand old heart, after all!
why should any one give chase to that hated fish! Away with me! let us
fly these deadly waters! let us home! Wife and child, too, are
Starbuck’s—wife and child of his brotherly, sisterly, play-fellow
youth; even as thine, sir, are the wife and child of thy loving,
longing, paternal old age! Away! let us away!—this instant let me alter
the course! How cheerily, how hilariously, O my Captain, would we bowl
on our way to see old Nantucket again! I think, sir, they have some
such mild blue days, even as this, in Nantucket.”

“They have, they have. I have seen them—some summer days in the
morning. About this time—yes, it is his noon nap now—the boy
vivaciously wakes; sits up in bed; and his mother tells him of me, of
cannibal old me; how I am abroad upon the deep, but will yet come back
to dance him again.”

“’Tis my Mary, my Mary herself! She promised that my boy, every
morning, should be carried to the hill to catch the first glimpse of
his father’s sail! Yes, yes! no more! it is done! we head for
Nantucket! Come, my Captain, study out the course, and let us away!
See, see! the boy’s face from the window! the boy’s hand on the hill!”

But Ahab’s glance was averted; like a blighted fruit tree he shook, and
cast his last, cindered apple to the soil.

“What is it, what nameless, inscrutable, unearthly thing is it; what
cozening, hidden lord and master, and cruel, remorseless emperor
commands me; that against all natural lovings and longings, I so keep
pushing, and crowding, and jamming myself on all the time; recklessly
making me ready to do what in my own proper, natural heart, I durst not
so much as dare? Is Ahab, Ahab? Is it I, God, or who, that lifts this
arm? But if the great sun move not of himself; but is as an errand-boy
in heaven; nor one single star can revolve, but by some invisible
power; how then can this one small heart beat; this one small brain
think thoughts; unless God does that beating, does that thinking, does
that living, and not I. By heaven, man, we are turned round and round
in this world, like yonder windlass, and Fate is the handspike. And all
the time, lo! that smiling sky, and this unsounded sea! Look! see yon
Albicore! who put it into him to chase and fang that flying-fish? Where
do murderers go, man! Who’s to doom, when the judge himself is dragged
to the bar? But it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky; and
the air smells now, as if it blew from a far-away meadow; they have
been making hay somewhere under the slopes of the Andes, Starbuck, and
the mowers are sleeping among the new-mown hay. Sleeping? Aye, toil we
how we may, we all sleep at last on the field. Sleep? Aye, and rust
amid greenness; as last year’s scythes flung down, and left in the
half-cut swaths—Starbuck!”

But blanched to a corpse’s hue with despair, the Mate had stolen away.

Ahab crossed the deck to gaze over on the other side; but started at
two reflected, fixed eyes in the water there. Fedallah was motionlessly
leaning over the same rail.


CHAPTER 133. The Chase—First Day.

That night, in the mid-watch, when the old man—as his wont at
intervals—stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned, and went
to his pivot-hole, he suddenly thrust out his face fiercely, snuffing
up the sea air as a sagacious ship’s dog will, in drawing nigh to some
barbarous isle. He declared that a whale must be near. Soon that
peculiar odor, sometimes to a great distance given forth by the living
sperm whale, was palpable to all the watch; nor was any mariner
surprised when, after inspecting the compass, and then the dog-vane,
and then ascertaining the precise bearing of the odor as nearly as
possible, Ahab rapidly ordered the ship’s course to be slightly
altered, and the sail to be shortened.

The acute policy dictating these movements was sufficiently vindicated
at daybreak, by the sight of a long sleek on the sea directly and
lengthwise ahead, smooth as oil, and resembling in the pleated watery
wrinkles bordering it, the polished metallic-like marks of some swift
tide-rip, at the mouth of a deep, rapid stream.

“Man the mast-heads! Call all hands!”

Thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on the forecastle
deck, Daggoo roused the sleepers with such judgment claps that they
seemed to exhale from the scuttle, so instantaneously did they appear
with their clothes in their hands.

“What d’ye see?” cried Ahab, flattening his face to the sky.

“Nothing, nothing sir!” was the sound hailing down in reply.

“T’gallant sails!—stunsails! alow and aloft, and on both sides!”

All sail being set, he now cast loose the life-line, reserved for
swaying him to the main royal-mast head; and in a few moments they were
hoisting him thither, when, while but two thirds of the way aloft, and
while peering ahead through the horizontal vacancy between the
main-top-sail and top-gallant-sail, he raised a gull-like cry in the
air. “There she blows!—there she blows! A hump like a snow-hill! It is
Moby Dick!”

Fired by the cry which seemed simultaneously taken up by the three
look-outs, the men on deck rushed to the rigging to behold the famous
whale they had so long been pursuing. Ahab had now gained his final
perch, some feet above the other look-outs, Tashtego standing just
beneath him on the cap of the top-gallant-mast, so that the Indian’s
head was almost on a level with Ahab’s heel. From this height the whale
was now seen some mile or so ahead, at every roll of the sea revealing
his high sparkling hump, and regularly jetting his silent spout into
the air. To the credulous mariners it seemed the same silent spout they
had so long ago beheld in the moonlit Atlantic and Indian Oceans.

“And did none of ye see it before?” cried Ahab, hailing the perched men
all around him.

“I saw him almost that same instant, sir, that Captain Ahab did, and I
cried out,” said Tashtego.

“Not the same instant; not the same—no, the doubloon is mine, Fate
reserved the doubloon for me. _I_ only; none of ye could have raised
the White Whale first. There she blows!—there she blows!—there she
blows! There again!—there again!” he cried, in long-drawn, lingering,
methodic tones, attuned to the gradual prolongings of the whale’s
visible jets. “He’s going to sound! In stunsails! Down
top-gallant-sails! Stand by three boats. Mr. Starbuck, remember, stay
on board, and keep the ship. Helm there! Luff, luff a point! So;
steady, man, steady! There go flukes! No, no; only black water! All
ready the boats there? Stand by, stand by! Lower me, Mr. Starbuck;
lower, lower,—quick, quicker!” and he slid through the air to the deck.

“He is heading straight to leeward, sir,” cried Stubb, “right away from
us; cannot have seen the ship yet.”

“Be dumb, man! Stand by the braces! Hard down the helm!—brace up!
Shiver her!—shiver her!—So; well that! Boats, boats!”

Soon all the boats but Starbuck’s were dropped; all the boat-sails
set—all the paddles plying; with rippling swiftness, shooting to
leeward; and Ahab heading the onset. A pale, death-glimmer lit up
Fedallah’s sunken eyes; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth.

Like noiseless nautilus shells, their light prows sped through the sea;
but only slowly they neared the foe. As they neared him, the ocean grew
still more smooth; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves; seemed a
noon-meadow, so serenely it spread. At length the breathless hunter
came so nigh his seemingly unsuspecting prey, that his entire dazzling
hump was distinctly visible, sliding along the sea as if an isolated
thing, and continually set in a revolving ring of finest, fleecy,
greenish foam. He saw the vast, involved wrinkles of the slightly
projecting head beyond. Before it, far out on the soft Turkish-rugged
waters, went the glistening white shadow from his broad, milky
forehead, a musical rippling playfully accompanying the shade; and
behind, the blue waters interchangeably flowed over into the moving
valley of his steady wake; and on either hand bright bubbles arose and
danced by his side. But these were broken again by the light toes of
hundreds of gay fowl softly feathering the sea, alternate with their
fitful flight; and like to some flag-staff rising from the painted hull
of an argosy, the tall but shattered pole of a recent lance projected
from the white whale’s back; and at intervals one of the cloud of
soft-toed fowls hovering, and to and fro skimming like a canopy over
the fish, silently perched and rocked on this pole, the long tail
feathers streaming like pennons.

A gentle joyousness—a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness, invested
the gliding whale. Not the white bull Jupiter swimming away with
ravished Europa clinging to his graceful horns; his lovely, leering
eyes sideways intent upon the maid; with smooth bewitching fleetness,
rippling straight for the nuptial bower in Crete; not Jove, not that
great majesty Supreme! did surpass the glorified White Whale as he so
divinely swam.

On each soft side—coincident with the parted swell, that but once
leaving him, then flowed so wide away—on each bright side, the whale
shed off enticings. No wonder there had been some among the hunters who
namelessly transported and allured by all this serenity, had ventured
to assail it; but had fatally found that quietude but the vesture of
tornadoes. Yet calm, enticing calm, oh, whale! thou glidest on, to all
who for the first time eye thee, no matter how many in that same way
thou may’st have bejuggled and destroyed before.

And thus, through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea, among
waves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture, Moby
Dick moved on, still withholding from sight the full terrors of his
submerged trunk, entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of his jaw.
But soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the water; for an
instant his whole marbleized body formed a high arch, like Virginia’s
Natural Bridge, and warningly waving his bannered flukes in the air,
the grand god revealed himself, sounded, and went out of sight.
Hoveringly halting, and dipping on the wing, the white sea-fowls
longingly lingered over the agitated pool that he left.

With oars apeak, and paddles down, the sheets of their sails adrift,
the three boats now stilly floated, awaiting Moby Dick’s reappearance.

“An hour,” said Ahab, standing rooted in his boat’s stern; and he gazed
beyond the whale’s place, towards the dim blue spaces and wide wooing
vacancies to leeward. It was only an instant; for again his eyes seemed
whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle. The breeze
now freshened; the sea began to swell.

“The birds!—the birds!” cried Tashtego.

In long Indian file, as when herons take wing, the white birds were now
all flying towards Ahab’s boat; and when within a few yards began
fluttering over the water there, wheeling round and round, with joyous,
expectant cries. Their vision was keener than man’s; Ahab could
discover no sign in the sea. But suddenly as he peered down and down
into its depths, he profoundly saw a white living spot no bigger than a
white weasel, with wonderful celerity uprising, and magnifying as it
rose, till it turned, and then there were plainly revealed two long
crooked rows of white, glistening teeth, floating up from the
undiscoverable bottom. It was Moby Dick’s open mouth and scrolled jaw;
his vast, shadowed bulk still half blending with the blue of the sea.
The glittering mouth yawned beneath the boat like an open-doored marble
tomb; and giving one sidelong sweep with his steering oar, Ahab whirled
the craft aside from this tremendous apparition. Then, calling upon
Fedallah to change places with him, went forward to the bows, and
seizing Perth’s harpoon, commanded his crew to grasp their oars and
stand by to stern.

Now, by reason of this timely spinning round the boat upon its axis,
its bow, by anticipation, was made to face the whale’s head while yet
under water. But as if perceiving this stratagem, Moby Dick, with that
malicious intelligence ascribed to him, sidelingly transplanted
himself, as it were, in an instant, shooting his pleated head
lengthwise beneath the boat.

Through and through; through every plank and each rib, it thrilled for
an instant, the whale obliquely lying on his back, in the manner of a
biting shark, slowly and feelingly taking its bows full within his
mouth, so that the long, narrow, scrolled lower jaw curled high up into
the open air, and one of the teeth caught in a row-lock. The bluish
pearl-white of the inside of the jaw was within six inches of Ahab’s
head, and reached higher than that. In this attitude the White Whale
now shook the slight cedar as a mildly cruel cat her mouse. With
unastonished eyes Fedallah gazed, and crossed his arms; but the
tiger-yellow crew were tumbling over each other’s heads to gain the
uttermost stern.

And now, while both elastic gunwales were springing in and out, as the
whale dallied with the doomed craft in this devilish way; and from his
body being submerged beneath the boat, he could not be darted at from
the bows, for the bows were almost inside of him, as it were; and while
the other boats involuntarily paused, as before a quick crisis
impossible to withstand, then it was that monomaniac Ahab, furious with
this tantalizing vicinity of his foe, which placed him all alive and
helpless in the very jaws he hated; frenzied with all this, he seized
the long bone with his naked hands, and wildly strove to wrench it from
its gripe. As now he thus vainly strove, the jaw slipped from him; the
frail gunwales bent in, collapsed, and snapped, as both jaws, like an
enormous shears, sliding further aft, bit the craft completely in
twain, and locked themselves fast again in the sea, midway between the
two floating wrecks. These floated aside, the broken ends drooping, the
crew at the stern-wreck clinging to the gunwales, and striving to hold
fast to the oars to lash them across.

At that preluding moment, ere the boat was yet snapped, Ahab, the first
to perceive the whale’s intent, by the crafty upraising of his head, a
movement that loosed his hold for the time; at that moment his hand had
made one final effort to push the boat out of the bite. But only
slipping further into the whale’s mouth, and tilting over sideways as
it slipped, the boat had shaken off his hold on the jaw; spilled him
out of it, as he leaned to the push; and so he fell flat-faced upon the
sea.

Ripplingly withdrawing from his prey, Moby Dick now lay at a little
distance, vertically thrusting his oblong white head up and down in the
billows; and at the same time slowly revolving his whole spindled body;
so that when his vast wrinkled forehead rose—some twenty or more feet
out of the water—the now rising swells, with all their confluent waves,
dazzlingly broke against it; vindictively tossing their shivered spray
still higher into the air.* So, in a gale, the but half baffled Channel
billows only recoil from the base of the Eddystone, triumphantly to
overleap its summit with their scud.

*This motion is peculiar to the sperm whale. It receives its
designation (pitchpoling) from its being likened to that preliminary
up-and-down poise of the whale-lance, in the exercise called
pitchpoling, previously described. By this motion the whale must best
and most comprehensively view whatever objects may be encircling him.

But soon resuming his horizontal attitude, Moby Dick swam swiftly round
and round the wrecked crew; sideways churning the water in his vengeful
wake, as if lashing himself up to still another and more deadly
assault. The sight of the splintered boat seemed to madden him, as the
blood of grapes and mulberries cast before Antiochus’s elephants in the
book of Maccabees. Meanwhile Ahab half smothered in the foam of the
whale’s insolent tail, and too much of a cripple to swim,—though he
could still keep afloat, even in the heart of such a whirlpool as that;
helpless Ahab’s head was seen, like a tossed bubble which the least
chance shock might burst. From the boat’s fragmentary stern, Fedallah
incuriously and mildly eyed him; the clinging crew, at the other
drifting end, could not succor him; more than enough was it for them to
look to themselves. For so revolvingly appalling was the White Whale’s
aspect, and so planetarily swift the ever-contracting circles he made,
that he seemed horizontally swooping upon them. And though the other
boats, unharmed, still hovered hard by; still they dared not pull into
the eddy to strike, lest that should be the signal for the instant
destruction of the jeopardized castaways, Ahab and all; nor in that
case could they themselves hope to escape. With straining eyes, then,
they remained on the outer edge of the direful zone, whose centre had
now become the old man’s head.

Meantime, from the beginning all this had been descried from the ship’s
mast heads; and squaring her yards, she had borne down upon the scene;
and was now so nigh, that Ahab in the water hailed her!—“Sail on
the”—but that moment a breaking sea dashed on him from Moby Dick, and
whelmed him for the time. But struggling out of it again, and chancing
to rise on a towering crest, he shouted,—“Sail on the whale!—Drive him
off!”

The Pequod’s prows were pointed; and breaking up the charmed circle,
she effectually parted the white whale from his victim. As he sullenly
swam off, the boats flew to the rescue.

Dragged into Stubb’s boat with blood-shot, blinded eyes, the white
brine caking in his wrinkles; the long tension of Ahab’s bodily
strength did crack, and helplessly he yielded to his body’s doom: for a
time, lying all crushed in the bottom of Stubb’s boat, like one trodden
under foot of herds of elephants. Far inland, nameless wails came from
him, as desolate sounds from out ravines.

But this intensity of his physical prostration did but so much the more
abbreviate it. In an instant’s compass, great hearts sometimes condense
to one deep pang, the sum total of those shallow pains kindly diffused
through feebler men’s whole lives. And so, such hearts, though summary
in each one suffering; still, if the gods decree it, in their life-time
aggregate a whole age of woe, wholly made up of instantaneous
intensities; for even in their pointless centres, those noble natures
contain the entire circumferences of inferior souls.

“The harpoon,” said Ahab, half way rising, and draggingly leaning on
one bended arm—“is it safe?”

“Aye, sir, for it was not darted; this is it,” said Stubb, showing it.

“Lay it before me;—any missing men?”

“One, two, three, four, five;—there were five oars, sir, and here are
five men.”

“That’s good.—Help me, man; I wish to stand. So, so, I see him! there!
there! going to leeward still; what a leaping spout!—Hands off from me!
The eternal sap runs up in Ahab’s bones again! Set the sail; out oars;
the helm!”

It is often the case that when a boat is stove, its crew, being picked
up by another boat, help to work that second boat; and the chase is
thus continued with what is called double-banked oars. It was thus now.
But the added power of the boat did not equal the added power of the
whale, for he seemed to have treble-banked his every fin; swimming with
a velocity which plainly showed, that if now, under these
circumstances, pushed on, the chase would prove an indefinitely
prolonged, if not a hopeless one; nor could any crew endure for so long
a period, such an unintermitted, intense straining at the oar; a thing
barely tolerable only in some one brief vicissitude. The ship itself,
then, as it sometimes happens, offered the most promising intermediate
means of overtaking the chase. Accordingly, the boats now made for her,
and were soon swayed up to their cranes—the two parts of the wrecked
boat having been previously secured by her—and then hoisting everything
to her side, and stacking her canvas high up, and sideways
outstretching it with stun-sails, like the double-jointed wings of an
albatross; the Pequod bore down in the leeward wake of Moby-Dick. At
the well known, methodic intervals, the whale’s glittering spout was
regularly announced from the manned mast-heads; and when he would be
reported as just gone down, Ahab would take the time, and then pacing
the deck, binnacle-watch in hand, so soon as the last second of the
allotted hour expired, his voice was heard.—“Whose is the doubloon now?
D’ye see him?” and if the reply was, No, sir! straightway he commanded
them to lift him to his perch. In this way the day wore on; Ahab, now
aloft and motionless; anon, unrestingly pacing the planks.

As he was thus walking, uttering no sound, except to hail the men
aloft, or to bid them hoist a sail still higher, or to spread one to a
still greater breadth—thus to and fro pacing, beneath his slouched hat,
at every turn he passed his own wrecked boat, which had been dropped
upon the quarter-deck, and lay there reversed; broken bow to shattered
stern. At last he paused before it; and as in an already over-clouded
sky fresh troops of clouds will sometimes sail across, so over the old
man’s face there now stole some such added gloom as this.

Stubb saw him pause; and perhaps intending, not vainly, though, to
evince his own unabated fortitude, and thus keep up a valiant place in
his Captain’s mind, he advanced, and eyeing the wreck exclaimed—“The
thistle the ass refused; it pricked his mouth too keenly, sir; ha! ha!”

“What soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck? Man, man! did
I not know thee brave as fearless fire (and as mechanical) I could
swear thou wert a poltroon. Groan nor laugh should be heard before a
wreck.”

“Aye, sir,” said Starbuck drawing near, “’tis a solemn sight; an omen,
and an ill one.”

“Omen? omen?—the dictionary! If the gods think to speak outright to
man, they will honorably speak outright; not shake their heads, and
give an old wives’ darkling hint.—Begone! Ye two are the opposite poles
of one thing; Starbuck is Stubb reversed, and Stubb is Starbuck; and ye
two are all mankind; and Ahab stands alone among the millions of the
peopled earth, nor gods nor men his neighbors! Cold, cold—I shiver!—How
now? Aloft there! D’ye see him? Sing out for every spout, though he
spout ten times a second!”

The day was nearly done; only the hem of his golden robe was rustling.
Soon, it was almost dark, but the look-out men still remained unset.

“Can’t see the spout now, sir;—too dark”—cried a voice from the air.

“How heading when last seen?”

“As before, sir,—straight to leeward.”

“Good! he will travel slower now ’tis night. Down royals and
top-gallant stun-sails, Mr. Starbuck. We must not run over him before
morning; he’s making a passage now, and may heave-to a while. Helm
there! keep her full before the wind!—Aloft! come down!—Mr. Stubb, send
a fresh hand to the fore-mast head, and see it manned till
morning.”—Then advancing towards the doubloon in the main-mast—“Men,
this gold is mine, for I earned it; but I shall let it abide here till
the White Whale is dead; and then, whosoever of ye first raises him,
upon the day he shall be killed, this gold is that man’s; and if on
that day I shall again raise him, then, ten times its sum shall be
divided among all of ye! Away now!—the deck is thine, sir!”

And so saying, he placed himself half way within the scuttle, and
slouching his hat, stood there till dawn, except when at intervals
rousing himself to see how the night wore on.


CHAPTER 134. The Chase—Second Day.

At day-break, the three mast-heads were punctually manned afresh.

“D’ye see him?” cried Ahab after allowing a little space for the light
to spread.

“See nothing, sir.”

“Turn up all hands and make sail! he travels faster than I thought
for;—the top-gallant sails!—aye, they should have been kept on her all
night. But no matter—’tis but resting for the rush.”

Here be it said, that this pertinacious pursuit of one particular
whale, continued through day into night, and through night into day, is
a thing by no means unprecedented in the South sea fishery. For such is
the wonderful skill, prescience of experience, and invincible
confidence acquired by some great natural geniuses among the Nantucket
commanders; that from the simple observation of a whale when last
descried, they will, under certain given circumstances, pretty
accurately foretell both the direction in which he will continue to
swim for a time, while out of sight, as well as his probable rate of
progression during that period. And, in these cases, somewhat as a
pilot, when about losing sight of a coast, whose general trending he
well knows, and which he desires shortly to return to again, but at
some further point; like as this pilot stands by his compass, and takes
the precise bearing of the cape at present visible, in order the more
certainly to hit aright the remote, unseen headland, eventually to be
visited: so does the fisherman, at his compass, with the whale; for
after being chased, and diligently marked, through several hours of
daylight, then, when night obscures the fish, the creature’s future
wake through the darkness is almost as established to the sagacious
mind of the hunter, as the pilot’s coast is to him. So that to this
hunter’s wondrous skill, the proverbial evanescence of a thing writ in
water, a wake, is to all desired purposes well nigh as reliable as the
steadfast land. And as the mighty iron Leviathan of the modern railway
is so familiarly known in its every pace, that, with watches in their
hands, men time his rate as doctors that of a baby’s pulse; and lightly
say of it, the up train or the down train will reach such or such a
spot, at such or such an hour; even so, almost, there are occasions
when these Nantucketers time that other Leviathan of the deep,
according to the observed humor of his speed; and say to themselves, so
many hours hence this whale will have gone two hundred miles, will have
about reached this or that degree of latitude or longitude. But to
render this acuteness at all successful in the end, the wind and the
sea must be the whaleman’s allies; for of what present avail to the
becalmed or windbound mariner is the skill that assures him he is
exactly ninety-three leagues and a quarter from his port? Inferable
from these statements, are many collateral subtile matters touching the
chase of whales.

The ship tore on; leaving such a furrow in the sea as when a
cannon-ball, missent, becomes a plough-share and turns up the level
field.

“By salt and hemp!” cried Stubb, “but this swift motion of the deck
creeps up one’s legs and tingles at the heart. This ship and I are two
brave fellows!—Ha, ha! Some one take me up, and launch me, spine-wise,
on the sea,—for by live-oaks! my spine’s a keel. Ha, ha! we go the gait
that leaves no dust behind!”

“There she blows—she blows!—she blows!—right ahead!” was now the
mast-head cry.

“Aye, aye!” cried Stubb, “I knew it—ye can’t escape—blow on and split
your spout, O whale! the mad fiend himself is after ye! blow your
trump—blister your lungs!—Ahab will dam off your blood, as a miller
shuts his watergate upon the stream!”

And Stubb did but speak out for well nigh all that crew. The frenzies
of the chase had by this time worked them bubblingly up, like old wine
worked anew. Whatever pale fears and forebodings some of them might
have felt before; these were not only now kept out of sight through the
growing awe of Ahab, but they were broken up, and on all sides routed,
as timid prairie hares that scatter before the bounding bison. The hand
of Fate had snatched all their souls; and by the stirring perils of the
previous day; the rack of the past night’s suspense; the fixed,
unfearing, blind, reckless way in which their wild craft went plunging
towards its flying mark; by all these things, their hearts were bowled
along. The wind that made great bellies of their sails, and rushed the
vessel on by arms invisible as irresistible; this seemed the symbol of
that unseen agency which so enslaved them to the race.

They were one man, not thirty. For as the one ship that held them all;
though it was put together of all contrasting things—oak, and maple,
and pine wood; iron, and pitch, and hemp—yet all these ran into each
other in the one concrete hull, which shot on its way, both balanced
and directed by the long central keel; even so, all the individualities
of the crew, this man’s valor, that man’s fear; guilt and guiltiness,
all varieties were welded into oneness, and were all directed to that
fatal goal which Ahab their one lord and keel did point to.

The rigging lived. The mast-heads, like the tops of tall palms, were
outspreadingly tufted with arms and legs. Clinging to a spar with one
hand, some reached forth the other with impatient wavings; others,
shading their eyes from the vivid sunlight, sat far out on the rocking
yards; all the spars in full bearing of mortals, ready and ripe for
their fate. Ah! how they still strove through that infinite blueness to
seek out the thing that might destroy them!

“Why sing ye not out for him, if ye see him?” cried Ahab, when, after
the lapse of some minutes since the first cry, no more had been heard.
“Sway me up, men; ye have been deceived; not Moby Dick casts one odd
jet that way, and then disappears.”

It was even so; in their headlong eagerness, the men had mistaken some
other thing for the whale-spout, as the event itself soon proved; for
hardly had Ahab reached his perch; hardly was the rope belayed to its
pin on deck, when he struck the key-note to an orchestra, that made the
air vibrate as with the combined discharges of rifles. The triumphant
halloo of thirty buckskin lungs was heard, as—much nearer to the ship
than the place of the imaginary jet, less than a mile ahead—Moby Dick
bodily burst into view! For not by any calm and indolent spoutings; not
by the peaceable gush of that mystic fountain in his head, did the
White Whale now reveal his vicinity; but by the far more wondrous
phenomenon of breaching. Rising with his utmost velocity from the
furthest depths, the Sperm Whale thus booms his entire bulk into the
pure element of air, and piling up a mountain of dazzling foam, shows
his place to the distance of seven miles and more. In those moments,
the torn, enraged waves he shakes off, seem his mane; in some cases,
this breaching is his act of defiance.

“There she breaches! there she breaches!” was the cry, as in his
immeasurable bravadoes the White Whale tossed himself salmon-like to
Heaven. So suddenly seen in the blue plain of the sea, and relieved
against the still bluer margin of the sky, the spray that he raised,
for the moment, intolerably glittered and glared like a glacier; and
stood there gradually fading and fading away from its first sparkling
intensity, to the dim mistiness of an advancing shower in a vale.

“Aye, breach your last to the sun, Moby Dick!” cried Ahab, “thy hour
and thy harpoon are at hand!—Down! down all of ye, but one man at the
fore. The boats!—stand by!”

Unmindful of the tedious rope-ladders of the shrouds, the men, like
shooting stars, slid to the deck, by the isolated backstays and
halyards; while Ahab, less dartingly, but still rapidly was dropped
from his perch.

“Lower away,” he cried, so soon as he had reached his boat—a spare one,
rigged the afternoon previous. “Mr. Starbuck, the ship is thine—keep
away from the boats, but keep near them. Lower, all!”

As if to strike a quick terror into them, by this time being the first
assailant himself, Moby Dick had turned, and was now coming for the
three crews. Ahab’s boat was central; and cheering his men, he told
them he would take the whale head-and-head,—that is, pull straight up
to his forehead,—a not uncommon thing; for when within a certain limit,
such a course excludes the coming onset from the whale’s sidelong
vision. But ere that close limit was gained, and while yet all three
boats were plain as the ship’s three masts to his eye; the White Whale
churning himself into furious speed, almost in an instant as it were,
rushing among the boats with open jaws, and a lashing tail, offered
appalling battle on every side; and heedless of the irons darted at him
from every boat, seemed only intent on annihilating each separate plank
of which those boats were made. But skilfully manœuvred, incessantly
wheeling like trained chargers in the field; the boats for a while
eluded him; though, at times, but by a plank’s breadth; while all the
time, Ahab’s unearthly slogan tore every other cry but his to shreds.

But at last in his untraceable evolutions, the White Whale so crossed
and recrossed, and in a thousand ways entangled the slack of the three
lines now fast to him, that they foreshortened, and, of themselves,
warped the devoted boats towards the planted irons in him; though now
for a moment the whale drew aside a little, as if to rally for a more
tremendous charge. Seizing that opportunity, Ahab first paid out more
line: and then was rapidly hauling and jerking in upon it again—hoping
that way to disencumber it of some snarls—when lo!—a sight more savage
than the embattled teeth of sharks!

Caught and twisted—corkscrewed in the mazes of the line, loose harpoons
and lances, with all their bristling barbs and points, came flashing
and dripping up to the chocks in the bows of Ahab’s boat. Only one
thing could be done. Seizing the boat-knife, he critically reached
within—through—and then, without—the rays of steel; dragged in the line
beyond, passed it, inboard, to the bowsman, and then, twice sundering
the rope near the chocks—dropped the intercepted fagot of steel into
the sea; and was all fast again. That instant, the White Whale made a
sudden rush among the remaining tangles of the other lines; by so
doing, irresistibly dragged the more involved boats of Stubb and Flask
towards his flukes; dashed them together like two rolling husks on a
surf-beaten beach, and then, diving down into the sea, disappeared in a
boiling maelstrom, in which, for a space, the odorous cedar chips of
the wrecks danced round and round, like the grated nutmeg in a swiftly
stirred bowl of punch.

While the two crews were yet circling in the waters, reaching out after
the revolving line-tubs, oars, and other floating furniture, while
aslope little Flask bobbed up and down like an empty vial, twitching
his legs upwards to escape the dreaded jaws of sharks; and Stubb was
lustily singing out for some one to ladle him up; and while the old
man’s line—now parting—admitted of his pulling into the creamy pool to
rescue whom he could;—in that wild simultaneousness of a thousand
concreted perils,—Ahab’s yet unstricken boat seemed drawn up towards
Heaven by invisible wires,—as, arrow-like, shooting perpendicularly
from the sea, the White Whale dashed his broad forehead against its
bottom, and sent it, turning over and over, into the air; till it fell
again—gunwale downwards—and Ahab and his men struggled out from under
it, like seals from a sea-side cave.

The first uprising momentum of the whale—modifying its direction as he
struck the surface—involuntarily launched him along it, to a little
distance from the centre of the destruction he had made; and with his
back to it, he now lay for a moment slowly feeling with his flukes from
side to side; and whenever a stray oar, bit of plank, the least chip or
crumb of the boats touched his skin, his tail swiftly drew back, and
came sideways smiting the sea. But soon, as if satisfied that his work
for that time was done, he pushed his pleated forehead through the
ocean, and trailing after him the intertangled lines, continued his
leeward way at a traveller’s methodic pace.

As before, the attentive ship having descried the whole fight, again
came bearing down to the rescue, and dropping a boat, picked up the
floating mariners, tubs, oars, and whatever else could be caught at,
and safely landed them on her decks. Some sprained shoulders, wrists,
and ankles; livid contusions; wrenched harpoons and lances;
inextricable intricacies of rope; shattered oars and planks; all these
were there; but no fatal or even serious ill seemed to have befallen
any one. As with Fedallah the day before, so Ahab was now found grimly
clinging to his boat’s broken half, which afforded a comparatively easy
float; nor did it so exhaust him as the previous day’s mishap.

But when he was helped to the deck, all eyes were fastened upon him; as
instead of standing by himself he still half-hung upon the shoulder of
Starbuck, who had thus far been the foremost to assist him. His ivory
leg had been snapped off, leaving but one short sharp splinter.

“Aye, aye, Starbuck, ’tis sweet to lean sometimes, be the leaner who he
will; and would old Ahab had leaned oftener than he has.”

“The ferrule has not stood, sir,” said the carpenter, now coming up; “I
put good work into that leg.”

“But no bones broken, sir, I hope,” said Stubb with true concern.

“Aye! and all splintered to pieces, Stubb!—d’ye see it.—But even with a
broken bone, old Ahab is untouched; and I account no living bone of
mine one jot more me, than this dead one that’s lost. Nor white whale,
nor man, nor fiend, can so much as graze old Ahab in his own proper and
inaccessible being. Can any lead touch yonder floor, any mast scrape
yonder roof?—Aloft there! which way?”

“Dead to leeward, sir.”

“Up helm, then; pile on the sail again, ship keepers! down the rest of
the spare boats and rig them—Mr. Starbuck away, and muster the boat’s
crews.”

“Let me first help thee towards the bulwarks, sir.”

“Oh, oh, oh! how this splinter gores me now! Accursed fate! that the
unconquerable captain in the soul should have such a craven mate!”

“Sir?”

“My body, man, not thee. Give me something for a cane—there, that
shivered lance will do. Muster the men. Surely I have not seen him yet.
By heaven it cannot be!—missing?—quick! call them all.”

The old man’s hinted thought was true. Upon mustering the company, the
Parsee was not there.

“The Parsee!” cried Stubb—“he must have been caught in——”

“The black vomit wrench thee!—run all of ye above, alow, cabin,
forecastle—find him—not gone—not gone!”

But quickly they returned to him with the tidings that the Parsee was
nowhere to be found.

“Aye, sir,” said Stubb—“caught among the tangles of your line—I thought
I saw him dragging under.”

“_My_ line! _my_ line? Gone?—gone? What means that little word?—What
death-knell rings in it, that old Ahab shakes as if he were the belfry.
The harpoon, too!—toss over the litter there,—d’ye see it?—the forged
iron, men, the white whale’s—no, no, no,—blistered fool! this hand did
dart it!—’tis in the fish!—Aloft there! Keep him nailed—Quick!—all
hands to the rigging of the boats—collect the oars—harpooneers! the
irons, the irons!—hoist the royals higher—a pull on all the
sheets!—helm there! steady, steady for your life! I’ll ten times girdle
the unmeasured globe; yea and dive straight through it, but I’ll slay
him yet!”

“Great God! but for one single instant show thyself,” cried Starbuck;
“never, never wilt thou capture him, old man—In Jesus’ name no more of
this, that’s worse than devil’s madness. Two days chased; twice stove
to splinters; thy very leg once more snatched from under thee; thy evil
shadow gone—all good angels mobbing thee with warnings:—what more
wouldst thou have?—Shall we keep chasing this murderous fish till he
swamps the last man? Shall we be dragged by him to the bottom of the
sea? Shall we be towed by him to the infernal world? Oh, oh,—Impiety
and blasphemy to hunt him more!”

“Starbuck, of late I’ve felt strangely moved to thee; ever since that
hour we both saw—thou know’st what, in one another’s eyes. But in this
matter of the whale, be the front of thy face to me as the palm of this
hand—a lipless, unfeatured blank. Ahab is for ever Ahab, man. This
whole act’s immutably decreed. ’Twas rehearsed by thee and me a billion
years before this ocean rolled. Fool! I am the Fates’ lieutenant; I act
under orders. Look thou, underling! that thou obeyest mine.—Stand round
me, men. Ye see an old man cut down to the stump; leaning on a shivered
lance; propped up on a lonely foot. ’Tis Ahab—his body’s part; but
Ahab’s soul’s a centipede, that moves upon a hundred legs. I feel
strained, half stranded, as ropes that tow dismasted frigates in a
gale; and I may look so. But ere I break, ye’ll hear me crack; and till
ye hear _that_, know that Ahab’s hawser tows his purpose yet. Believe
ye, men, in the things called omens? Then laugh aloud, and cry encore!
For ere they drown, drowning things will twice rise to the surface;
then rise again, to sink for evermore. So with Moby Dick—two days he’s
floated—tomorrow will be the third. Aye, men, he’ll rise once more,—but
only to spout his last! D’ye feel brave men, brave?”

“As fearless fire,” cried Stubb.

“And as mechanical,” muttered Ahab. Then as the men went forward, he
muttered on: “The things called omens! And yesterday I talked the same
to Starbuck there, concerning my broken boat. Oh! how valiantly I seek
to drive out of others’ hearts what’s clinched so fast in mine!—The
Parsee—the Parsee!—gone, gone? and he was to go before:—but still was
to be seen again ere I could perish—How’s that?—There’s a riddle now
might baffle all the lawyers backed by the ghosts of the whole line of
judges:—like a hawk’s beak it pecks my brain. _I’ll_, _I’ll_ solve it,
though!”

When dusk descended, the whale was still in sight to leeward.

So once more the sail was shortened, and everything passed nearly as on
the previous night; only, the sound of hammers, and the hum of the
grindstone was heard till nearly daylight, as the men toiled by
lanterns in the complete and careful rigging of the spare boats and
sharpening their fresh weapons for the morrow. Meantime, of the broken
keel of Ahab’s wrecked craft the carpenter made him another leg; while
still as on the night before, slouched Ahab stood fixed within his
scuttle; his hid, heliotrope glance anticipatingly gone backward on its
dial; sat due eastward for the earliest sun.


CHAPTER 135. The Chase.—Third Day.

The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more the
solitary night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds of the
daylight look-outs, who dotted every mast and almost every spar.

“D’ye see him?” cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.

“In his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that’s all. Helm
there; steady, as thou goest, and hast been going. What a lovely day
again! were it a new-made world, and made for a summer-house to the
angels, and this morning the first of its throwing open to them, a
fairer day could not dawn upon that world. Here’s food for thought, had
Ahab time to think; but Ahab never thinks; he only feels, feels, feels;
_that’s_ tingling enough for mortal man! to think’s audacity. God only
has that right and privilege. Thinking is, or ought to be, a coolness
and a calmness; and our poor hearts throb, and our poor brains beat too
much for that. And yet, I’ve sometimes thought my brain was very
calm—frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which the
contents turned to ice, and shiver it. And still this hair is growing
now; this moment growing, and heat must breed it; but no, it’s like
that sort of common grass that will grow anywhere, between the earthy
clefts of Greenland ice or in Vesuvius lava. How the wild winds blow
it; they whip it about me as the torn shreds of split sails lash the
tossed ship they cling to. A vile wind that has no doubt blown ere this
through prison corridors and cells, and wards of hospitals, and
ventilated them, and now comes blowing hither as innocent as fleeces.
Out upon it!—it’s tainted. Were I the wind, I’d blow no more on such a
wicked, miserable world. I’d crawl somewhere to a cave, and slink
there. And yet, ’tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who ever
conquered it? In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow. Run
tilting at it, and you but run through it. Ha! a coward wind that
strikes stark naked men, but will not stand to receive a single blow.
Even Ahab is a braver thing—a nobler thing than _that_. Would now the
wind but had a body; but all the things that most exasperate and
outrage mortal man, all these things are bodiless, but only bodiless as
objects, not as agents. There’s a most special, a most cunning, oh, a
most malicious difference! And yet, I say again, and swear it now, that
there’s something all glorious and gracious in the wind. These warm
Trade Winds, at least, that in the clear heavens blow straight on, in
strong and steadfast, vigorous mildness; and veer not from their mark,
however the baser currents of the sea may turn and tack, and mightiest
Mississippies of the land swift and swerve about, uncertain where to go
at last. And by the eternal Poles! these same Trades that so directly
blow my good ship on; these Trades, or something like them—something so
unchangeable, and full as strong, blow my keeled soul along! To it!
Aloft there! What d’ye see?”

“Nothing, sir.”

“Nothing! and noon at hand! The doubloon goes a-begging! See the sun!
Aye, aye, it must be so. I’ve oversailed him. How, got the start? Aye,
he’s chasing _me_ now; not I, _him_—that’s bad; I might have known it,
too. Fool! the lines—the harpoons he’s towing. Aye, aye, I have run him
by last night. About! about! Come down, all of ye, but the regular look
outs! Man the braces!”

Steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod’s
quarter, so that now being pointed in the reverse direction, the braced
ship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own
white wake.

“Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw,” murmured Starbuck to
himself, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail. “God
keep us, but already my bones feel damp within me, and from the inside
wet my flesh. I misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeying him!”

“Stand by to sway me up!” cried Ahab, advancing to the hempen basket.
“We should meet him soon.”

“Aye, aye, sir,” and straightway Starbuck did Ahab’s bidding, and once
more Ahab swung on high.

A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages. Time itself now held
long breaths with keen suspense. But at last, some three points off the
weather bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and instantly from the
three mast-heads three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had
voiced it.

“Forehead to forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick! On deck
there!—brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind’s eye. He’s too far
off to lower yet, Mr. Starbuck. The sails shake! Stand over that
helmsman with a top-maul! So, so; he travels fast, and I must down. But
let me have one more good round look aloft here at the sea; there’s
time for that. An old, old sight, and yet somehow so young; aye, and
not changed a wink since I first saw it, a boy, from the sand-hills of
Nantucket! The same!—the same!—the same to Noah as to me. There’s a
soft shower to leeward. Such lovely leewardings! They must lead
somewhere—to something else than common land, more palmy than the
palms. Leeward! the white whale goes that way; look to windward, then;
the better if the bitterer quarter. But good bye, good bye, old
mast-head! What’s this?—green? aye, tiny mosses in these warped cracks.
No such green weather stains on Ahab’s head! There’s the difference now
between man’s old age and matter’s. But aye, old mast, we both grow old
together; sound in our hulls, though, are we not, my ship? Aye, minus a
leg, that’s all. By heaven this dead wood has the better of my live
flesh every way. I can’t compare with it; and I’ve known some ships
made of dead trees outlast the lives of men made of the most vital
stuff of vital fathers. What’s that he said? he should still go before
me, my pilot; and yet to be seen again? But where? Will I have eyes at
the bottom of the sea, supposing I descend those endless stairs? and
all night I’ve been sailing from him, wherever he did sink to. Aye,
aye, like many more thou told’st direful truth as touching thyself, O
Parsee; but, Ahab, there thy shot fell short. Good-bye, mast-head—keep
a good eye upon the whale, the while I’m gone. We’ll talk to-morrow,
nay, to-night, when the white whale lies down there, tied by head and
tail.”

He gave the word; and still gazing round him, was steadily lowered
through the cloven blue air to the deck.

In due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his shallop’s
stern, Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he waved to the
mate,—who held one of the tackle-ropes on deck—and bade him pause.

“Starbuck!”

“Sir?”

“For the third time my soul’s ship starts upon this voyage, Starbuck.”

“Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so.”

“Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing,
Starbuck!”

“Truth, sir: saddest truth.”

“Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full of the
flood;—and I feel now like a billow that’s all one crested comb,
Starbuck. I am old;—shake hands with me, man.”

Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Starbuck’s tears the glue.

“Oh, my captain, my captain!—noble heart—go not—go not!—see, it’s a
brave man that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasion then!”

“Lower away!”—cried Ahab, tossing the mate’s arm from him. “Stand by
the crew!”

In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.

“The sharks! the sharks!” cried a voice from the low cabin-window
there; “O master, my master, come back!”

But Ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; and the
boat leaped on.

Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship, when
numbers of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneath
the hull, maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars, every time
they dipped in the water; and in this way accompanied the boat with
their bites. It is a thing not uncommonly happening to the whale-boats
in those swarming seas; the sharks at times apparently following them
in the same prescient way that vultures hover over the banners of
marching regiments in the east. But these were the first sharks that
had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale had been first
descried; and whether it was that Ahab’s crew were all such
tiger-yellow barbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky to the
senses of the sharks—a matter sometimes well known to affect
them,—however it was, they seemed to follow that one boat without
molesting the others.

“Heart of wrought steel!” murmured Starbuck gazing over the side, and
following with his eyes the receding boat—“canst thou yet ring boldly
to that sight?—lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, and followed by
them, open-mouthed to the chase; and this the critical third day?—For
when three days flow together in one continuous intense pursuit; be
sure the first is the morning, the second the noon, and the third the
evening and the end of that thing—be that end what it may. Oh! my God!
what is this that shoots through me, and leaves me so deadly calm, yet
expectant,—fixed at the top of a shudder! Future things swim before me,
as in empty outlines and skeletons; all the past is somehow grown dim.
Mary, girl! thou fadest in pale glories behind me; boy! I seem to see
but thy eyes grown wondrous blue. Strangest problems of life seem
clearing; but clouds sweep between—Is my journey’s end coming? My legs
feel faint; like his who has footed it all day. Feel thy heart,—beats
it yet? Stir thyself, Starbuck!—stave it off—move, move! speak
aloud!—Mast-head there! See ye my boy’s hand on the hill?—Crazed;—aloft
there!—keep thy keenest eye upon the boats:—mark well the whale!—Ho!
again!—drive off that hawk! see! he pecks—he tears the vane”—pointing
to the red flag flying at the main-truck—“Ha! he soars away with
it!—Where’s the old man now? see’st thou that sight, oh Ahab!—shudder,
shudder!”

The boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from the mast-heads—a
downward pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale had sounded; but
intending to be near him at the next rising, he held on his way a
little sideways from the vessel; the becharmed crew maintaining the
profoundest silence, as the head-beat waves hammered and hammered
against the opposing bow.

“Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their uttermost heads
drive them in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin and
no hearse can be mine:—and hemp only can kill me! Ha! ha!”

Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; then
quickly upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of ice,
swiftly rising to the surface. A low rumbling sound was heard; a
subterraneous hum; and then all held their breaths; as bedraggled with
trailing ropes, and harpoons, and lances, a vast form shot lengthwise,
but obliquely from the sea. Shrouded in a thin drooping veil of mist,
it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and then fell swamping
back into the deep. Crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters flashed for
an instant like heaps of fountains, then brokenly sank in a shower of
flakes, leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round the
marble trunk of the whale.

“Give way!” cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forward to
the attack; but maddened by yesterday’s fresh irons that corroded in
him, Moby Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell
from heaven. The wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad
white forehead, beneath the transparent skin, looked knitted together;
as head on, he came churning his tail among the boats; and once more
flailed them apart; spilling out the irons and lances from the two
mates’ boats, and dashing in one side of the upper part of their bows,
but leaving Ahab’s almost without a scar.

While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and as the
whale swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flank as he
shot by them again; at that moment a quick cry went up. Lashed round
and round to the fish’s back; pinioned in the turns upon turns in
which, during the past night, the whale had reeled the involutions of
the lines around him, the half torn body of the Parsee was seen; his
sable raiment frayed to shreds; his distended eyes turned full upon old
Ahab.

The harpoon dropped from his hand.

“Befooled, befooled!”—drawing in a long lean breath—“Aye, Parsee! I see
thee again.—Aye, and thou goest before; and this, _this_ then is the
hearse that thou didst promise. But I hold thee to the last letter of
thy word. Where is the second hearse? Away, mates, to the ship! those
boats are useless now; repair them if ye can in time, and return to me;
if not, Ahab is enough to die—Down, men! the first thing that but
offers to jump from this boat I stand in, that thing I harpoon. Ye are
not other men, but my arms and my legs; and so obey me.—Where’s the
whale? gone down again?”

But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping with the
corpse he bore, and as if the particular place of the last encounter
had been but a stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick was now again
steadily swimming forward; and had almost passed the ship,—which thus
far had been sailing in the contrary direction to him, though for the
present her headway had been stopped. He seemed swimming with his
utmost velocity, and now only intent upon pursuing his own straight
path in the sea.

“Oh! Ahab,” cried Starbuck, “not too late is it, even now, the third
day, to desist. See! Moby Dick seeks thee not. It is thou, thou, that
madly seekest him!”

Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly impelled
to leeward, by both oars and canvas. And at last when Ahab was sliding
by the vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck’s face as he
leaned over the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel about, and
follow him, not too swiftly, at a judicious interval. Glancing upwards,
he saw Tashtego, Queequeg, and Daggoo, eagerly mounting to the three
mast-heads; while the oarsmen were rocking in the two staved boats
which had but just been hoisted to the side, and were busily at work in
repairing them. One after the other, through the port-holes, as he
sped, he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb and Flask, busying
themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances. As he saw all
this; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats; far other hammers
seemed driving a nail into his heart. But he rallied. And now marking
that the vane or flag was gone from the main-mast-head, he shouted to
Tashtego, who had just gained that perch, to descend again for another
flag, and a hammer and nails, and so nail it to the mast.

Whether fagged by the three days’ running chase, and the resistance to
his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or whether it was some
latent deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was true, the White
Whale’s way now began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat so rapidly
nearing him once more; though indeed the whale’s last start had not
been so long a one as before. And still as Ahab glided over the waves
the unpitying sharks accompanied him; and so pertinaciously stuck to
the boat; and so continually bit at the plying oars, that the blades
became jagged and crunched, and left small splinters in the sea, at
almost every dip.

“Heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars. Pull
on! ’tis the better rest, the shark’s jaw than the yielding water.”

“But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!”

“They will last long enough! pull on!—But who can tell”—he
muttered—“whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on
Ahab?—But pull on! Aye, all alive, now—we near him. The helm! take the
helm! let me pass,”—and so saying two of the oarsmen helped him forward
to the bows of the still flying boat.

At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging along with
the White Whale’s flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of its
advance—as the whale sometimes will—and Ahab was fairly within the
smoky mountain mist, which, thrown off from the whale’s spout, curled
round his great, Monadnock hump; he was even thus close to him; when,
with body arched back, and both arms lengthwise high-lifted to the
poise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far fiercer curse into the
hated whale. As both steel and curse sank to the socket, as if sucked
into a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodically rolled his
nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole in it, so
suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been for the elevated
part of the gunwale to which he then clung, Ahab would once more have
been tossed into the sea. As it was, three of the oarsmen—who foreknew
not the precise instant of the dart, and were therefore unprepared for
its effects—these were flung out; but so fell, that, in an instant two
of them clutched the gunwale again, and rising to its level on a
combing wave, hurled themselves bodily inboard again; the third man
helplessly dropping astern, but still afloat and swimming.

Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated,
instantaneous swiftness, the White Whale darted through the weltering
sea. But when Ahab cried out to the steersman to take new turns with
the line, and hold it so; and commanded the crew to turn round on their
seats, and tow the boat up to the mark; the moment the treacherous line
felt that double strain and tug, it snapped in the empty air!

“What breaks in me? Some sinew cracks!—’tis whole again; oars! oars!
Burst in upon him!”

Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale wheeled
round to present his blank forehead at bay; but in that evolution,
catching sight of the nearing black hull of the ship; seemingly seeing
in it the source of all his persecutions; bethinking it—it may be—a
larger and nobler foe; of a sudden, he bore down upon its advancing
prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery showers of foam.

Ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead. “I grow blind; hands!
stretch out before me that I may yet grope my way. Is’t night?”

“The whale! The ship!” cried the cringing oarsmen.

“Oars! oars! Slope downwards to thy depths, O sea, that ere it be for
ever too late, Ahab may slide this last, last time upon his mark! I
see: the ship! the ship! Dash on, my men! Will ye not save my ship?”

But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through the
sledge-hammering seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two planks
burst through, and in an instant almost, the temporarily disabled boat
lay nearly level with the waves; its half-wading, splashing crew,
trying hard to stop the gap and bale out the pouring water.

Meantime, for that one beholding instant, Tashtego’s mast-head hammer
remained suspended in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrapping him as
with a plaid, then streamed itself straight out from him, as his own
forward-flowing heart; while Starbuck and Stubb, standing upon the
bowsprit beneath, caught sight of the down-coming monster just as soon
as he.

“The whale, the whale! Up helm, up helm! Oh, all ye sweet powers of
air, now hug me close! Let not Starbuck die, if die he must, in a
woman’s fainting fit. Up helm, I say—ye fools, the jaw! the jaw! Is
this the end of all my bursting prayers? all my life-long fidelities?
Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work. Steady! helmsman, steady. Nay, nay! Up
helm again! He turns to meet us! Oh, his unappeasable brow drives on
towards one, whose duty tells him he cannot depart. My God, stand by me
now!”

“Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will now
help Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here. I grin at thee, thou grinning
whale! Who ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, but Stubb’s own
unwinking eye? And now poor Stubb goes to bed upon a mattrass that is
all too soft; would it were stuffed with brushwood! I grin at thee,
thou grinning whale! Look ye, sun, moon, and stars! I call ye assassins
of as good a fellow as ever spouted up his ghost. For all that, I would
yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but hand the cup! Oh, oh! oh, oh!
thou grinning whale, but there’ll be plenty of gulping soon! Why fly ye
not, O Ahab! For me, off shoes and jacket to it; let Stubb die in his
drawers! A most mouldy and over salted death, though;—cherries!
cherries! cherries! Oh, Flask, for one red cherry ere we die!”

“Cherries? I only wish that we were where they grow. Oh, Stubb, I hope
my poor mother’s drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few coppers will
now come to her, for the voyage is up.”

From the ship’s bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive; hammers,
bits of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retained in their
hands, just as they had darted from their various employments; all
their enchanted eyes intent upon the whale, which from side to side
strangely vibrating his predestinating head, sent a broad band of
overspreading semicircular foam before him as he rushed. Retribution,
swift vengeance, eternal malice were in his whole aspect, and spite of
all that mortal man could do, the solid white buttress of his forehead
smote the ship’s starboard bow, till men and timbers reeled. Some fell
flat upon their faces. Like dislodged trucks, the heads of the
harpooneers aloft shook on their bull-like necks. Through the breach,
they heard the waters pour, as mountain torrents down a flume.

“The ship! The hearse!—the second hearse!” cried Ahab from the boat;
“its wood could only be American!”

Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along its
keel; but turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, far
off the other bow, but within a few yards of Ahab’s boat, where, for a
time, he lay quiescent.

“I turn my body from the sun. What ho, Tashtego! let me hear thy
hammer. Oh! ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncracked keel;
and only god-bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm, and
Pole-pointed prow,—death-glorious ship! must ye then perish, and
without me? Am I cut off from the last fond pride of meanest
shipwrecked captains? Oh, lonely death on lonely life! Oh, now I feel
my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief. Ho, ho! from all your
furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows of my whole foregone
life, and top this one piled comber of my death! Towards thee I roll,
thou all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last I grapple with
thee; from hell’s heart I stab at thee; for hate’s sake I spit my last
breath at thee. Sink all coffins and all hearses to one common pool!
and since neither can be mine, let me then tow to pieces, while still
chasing thee, though tied to thee, thou damned whale! _Thus_, I give up
the spear!”

The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; with igniting
velocity the line ran through the grooves;—ran foul. Ahab stooped to
clear it; he did clear it; but the flying turn caught him round the
neck, and voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring their victim, he was
shot out of the boat, ere the crew knew he was gone. Next instant, the
heavy eye-splice in the rope’s final end flew out of the stark-empty
tub, knocked down an oarsman, and smiting the sea, disappeared in its
depths.

For an instant, the tranced boat’s crew stood still; then turned. “The
ship? Great God, where is the ship?” Soon they through dim, bewildering
mediums saw her sidelong fading phantom, as in the gaseous Fata
Morgana; only the uppermost masts out of water; while fixed by
infatuation, or fidelity, or fate, to their once lofty perches, the
pagan harpooneers still maintained their sinking lookouts on the sea.
And now, concentric circles seized the lone boat itself, and all its
crew, and each floating oar, and every lance-pole, and spinning,
animate and inanimate, all round and round in one vortex, carried the
smallest chip of the Pequod out of sight.

But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over the
sunken head of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches of the
erect spar yet visible, together with long streaming yards of the flag,
which calmly undulated, with ironical coincidings, over the destroying
billows they almost touched;—at that instant, a red arm and a hammer
hovered backwardly uplifted in the open air, in the act of nailing the
flag faster and yet faster to the subsiding spar. A sky-hawk that
tauntingly had followed the main-truck downwards from its natural home
among the stars, pecking at the flag, and incommoding Tashtego there;
this bird now chanced to intercept its broad fluttering wing between
the hammer and the wood; and simultaneously feeling that etherial
thrill, the submerged savage beneath, in his death-gasp, kept his
hammer frozen there; and so the bird of heaven, with archangelic
shrieks, and his imperial beak thrust upwards, and his whole captive
form folded in the flag of Ahab, went down with his ship, which, like
Satan, would not sink to hell till she had dragged a living part of
heaven along with her, and helmeted herself with it.

Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen
white surf beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and the
great shroud of the sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand years ago.


Epilogue

“AND I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE” Job.

The drama’s done. Why then here does any one step forth?—Because one
did survive the wreck.

It so chanced, that after the Parsee’s disappearance, I was he whom the
Fates ordained to take the place of Ahab’s bowsman, when that bowsman
assumed the vacant post; the same, who, when on the last day the three
men were tossed from out of the rocking boat, was dropped astern. So,
floating on the margin of the ensuing scene, and in full sight of it,
when the halfspent suction of the sunk ship reached me, I was then, but
slowly, drawn towards the closing vortex. When I reached it, it had
subsided to a creamy pool. Round and round, then, and ever contracting
towards the button-like black bubble at the axis of that slowly
wheeling circle, like another Ixion I did revolve. Till, gaining that
vital centre, the black bubble upward burst; and now, liberated by
reason of its cunning spring, and, owing to its great buoyancy, rising
with great force, the coffin life-buoy shot lengthwise from the sea,
fell over, and floated by my side. Buoyed up by that coffin, for almost
one whole day and night, I floated on a soft and dirgelike main. The
unharming sharks, they glided by as if with padlocks on their mouths;
the savage sea-hawks sailed with sheathed beaks. On the second day, a
sail drew near, nearer, and picked me up at last. It was the
devious-cruising Rachel, that in her retracing search after her missing
children, only found another orphan.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOBY DICK; OR, THE WHALE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Romeo and Juliet
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Romeo and Juliet

Author: William Shakespeare

Release date: November 1, 1998 [eBook #1513]
                Most recently updated: June 19, 2024

Language: English

Credits: the PG Shakespeare Team, a team of about twenty Project Gutenberg volunteers


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROMEO AND JULIET ***




THE TRAGEDY OF ROMEO AND JULIET

by William Shakespeare




Contents

THE PROLOGUE.

ACT I
Scene I. A public place.
Scene II. A Street.
Scene III. Room in Capulet’s House.
Scene IV. A Street.
Scene V. A Hall in Capulet’s House.

ACT II
CHORUS.
Scene I. An open place adjoining Capulet’s Garden.
Scene II. Capulet’s Garden.
Scene III. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.
Scene IV. A Street.
Scene V. Capulet’s Garden.
Scene VI. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.

ACT III
Scene I. A public Place.
Scene II. A Room in Capulet’s House.
Scene III. Friar Lawrence’s cell.
Scene IV. A Room in Capulet’s House.
Scene V. An open Gallery to Juliet’s Chamber, overlooking the Garden.

ACT IV
Scene I. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.
Scene II. Hall in Capulet’s House.
Scene III. Juliet’s Chamber.
Scene IV. Hall in Capulet’s House.
Scene V. Juliet’s Chamber; Juliet on the bed.

ACT V
Scene I. Mantua. A Street.
Scene II. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.
Scene III. A churchyard; in it a Monument belonging to the Capulets.




 Dramatis Personæ

ESCALUS, Prince of Verona.
MERCUTIO, kinsman to the Prince, and friend to Romeo.
PARIS, a young Nobleman, kinsman to the Prince.
Page to Paris.

MONTAGUE, head of a Veronese family at feud with the Capulets.
LADY MONTAGUE, wife to Montague.
ROMEO, son to Montague.
BENVOLIO, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo.
ABRAM, servant to Montague.
BALTHASAR, servant to Romeo.

CAPULET, head of a Veronese family at feud with the Montagues.
LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
JULIET, daughter to Capulet.
TYBALT, nephew to Lady Capulet.
CAPULET’S COUSIN, an old man.
NURSE to Juliet.
PETER, servant to Juliet’s Nurse.
SAMPSON, servant to Capulet.
GREGORY, servant to Capulet.
Servants.

FRIAR LAWRENCE, a Franciscan.
FRIAR JOHN, of the same Order.
An Apothecary.
CHORUS.
Three Musicians.
An Officer.
Citizens of Verona; several Men and Women, relations to both houses;
Maskers, Guards, Watchmen and Attendants.

SCENE. During the greater part of the Play in Verona; once, in the
Fifth Act, at Mantua.




THE PROLOGUE


 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Two households, both alike in dignity,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-cross’d lovers take their life;
Whose misadventur’d piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents’ strife.
The fearful passage of their death-mark’d love,
And the continuance of their parents’ rage,
Which, but their children’s end, nought could remove,
Is now the two hours’ traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.

 [_Exit._]




ACT I

SCENE I. A public place.


 Enter Sampson and Gregory armed with swords and bucklers.

SAMPSON.
Gregory, on my word, we’ll not carry coals.

GREGORY.
No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON.
I mean, if we be in choler, we’ll draw.

GREGORY.
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o’ the collar.

SAMPSON.
I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMPSON.
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY.
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand: therefore, if thou
art moved, thou runn’st away.

SAMPSON.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand.
I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague’s.

GREGORY.
That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.

SAMPSON.
True, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to
the wall: therefore I will push Montague’s men from the wall, and
thrust his maids to the wall.

GREGORY.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

SAMPSON.
’Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I have fought with the
men I will be civil with the maids, I will cut off their heads.

GREGORY.
The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON.
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads; take it in what sense
thou wilt.

GREGORY.
They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON.
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and ’tis known I am a
pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY.
’Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor John.
Draw thy tool; here comes of the house of Montagues.

 Enter Abram and Balthasar.

SAMPSON.
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.

GREGORY.
How? Turn thy back and run?

SAMPSON.
Fear me not.

GREGORY.
No, marry; I fear thee!

SAMPSON.
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

GREGORY.
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.

SAMPSON.
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is disgrace to
them if they bear it.

ABRAM.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON.
I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAM.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON.
Is the law of our side if I say ay?

GREGORY.
No.

SAMPSON.
No sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY.
Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAM.
Quarrel, sir? No, sir.

SAMPSON.
But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as good a man as you.

ABRAM.
No better.

SAMPSON.
Well, sir.

 Enter Benvolio.

GREGORY.
Say better; here comes one of my master’s kinsmen.

SAMPSON.
Yes, better, sir.

ABRAM.
You lie.

SAMPSON.
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy washing blow.

 [_They fight._]

BENVOLIO.
Part, fools! put up your swords, you know not what you do.

 [_Beats down their swords._]

 Enter Tybalt.

TYBALT.
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee Benvolio, look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO.
I do but keep the peace, put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT.
What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Have at thee, coward.

 [_They fight._]

 Enter three or four Citizens with clubs.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Clubs, bills and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

 Enter Capulet in his gown, and Lady Capulet.

CAPULET.
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET.
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?

CAPULET.
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

 Enter Montague and his Lady Montague.

MONTAGUE.
Thou villain Capulet! Hold me not, let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE.
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

 Enter Prince Escalus, with Attendants.

PRINCE.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,—
Will they not hear? What, ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemper’d weapons to the ground
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturb’d the quiet of our streets,
And made Verona’s ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Canker’d with peace, to part your canker’d hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away:
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgement-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

 [_Exeunt Prince and Attendants; Capulet, Lady Capulet, Tybalt,
 Citizens and Servants._]

MONTAGUE.
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO.
Here were the servants of your adversary
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them, in the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar’d,
Which, as he breath’d defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head, and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal, hiss’d him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE.
O where is Romeo, saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO.
Madam, an hour before the worshipp’d sun
Peer’d forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me,
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I, measuring his affections by my own,
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Being one too many by my weary self,
Pursu’d my humour, not pursuing his,
And gladly shunn’d who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning’s dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora’s bed,
Away from light steals home my heavy son,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE.
I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO.
Have you importun’d him by any means?

MONTAGUE.
Both by myself and many other friends;
But he, his own affections’ counsellor,
Is to himself—I will not say how true—
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.

 Enter Romeo.

BENVOLIO.
See, where he comes. So please you step aside;
I’ll know his grievance or be much denied.

MONTAGUE.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let’s away,

 [_Exeunt Montague and Lady Montague._]

BENVOLIO.
Good morrow, cousin.

ROMEO.
Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO.
But new struck nine.

ROMEO.
Ay me, sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO.
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo’s hours?

ROMEO.
Not having that which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO.
In love?

ROMEO.
Out.

BENVOLIO.
Of love?

ROMEO.
Out of her favour where I am in love.

BENVOLIO.
Alas that love so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof.

ROMEO.
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here’s much to do with hate, but more with love:
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
O anything, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO.
No coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO.
Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO.
At thy good heart’s oppression.

ROMEO.
Why such is love’s transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it prest
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being purg’d, a fire sparkling in lovers’ eyes;
Being vex’d, a sea nourish’d with lovers’ tears:
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.

 [_Going._]

BENVOLIO.
Soft! I will go along:
And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO.
Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here.
This is not Romeo, he’s some other where.

BENVOLIO.
Tell me in sadness who is that you love?

ROMEO.
What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO.
Groan! Why, no; but sadly tell me who.

ROMEO.
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will,
A word ill urg’d to one that is so ill.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO.
I aim’d so near when I suppos’d you lov’d.

ROMEO.
A right good markman, and she’s fair I love.

BENVOLIO.
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO.
Well, in that hit you miss: she’ll not be hit
With Cupid’s arrow, she hath Dian’s wit;
And in strong proof of chastity well arm’d,
From love’s weak childish bow she lives uncharm’d.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms
Nor bide th’encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
O she’s rich in beauty, only poor
That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO.
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO.
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
For beauty starv’d with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise; wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO.
Be rul’d by me, forget to think of her.

ROMEO.
O teach me how I should forget to think.

BENVOLIO.
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
Examine other beauties.

ROMEO.
’Tis the way
To call hers, exquisite, in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies’ brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair;
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who pass’d that passing fair?
Farewell, thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO.
I’ll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Street.

 Enter Capulet, Paris and Servant.

CAPULET.
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike; and ’tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS.
Of honourable reckoning are you both,
And pity ’tis you liv’d at odds so long.
But now my lord, what say you to my suit?

CAPULET.
But saying o’er what I have said before.
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET.
And too soon marr’d are those so early made.
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent is but a part;
And she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustom’d feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love, and you among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well apparell’d April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in reckoning none.
Come, go with me. Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there, [_gives a paper_] and to them say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

 [_Exeunt Capulet and Paris._]

SERVANT.
Find them out whose names are written here! It is written that the
shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the
fisher with his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am sent to
find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what
names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned. In good
time!

 Enter Benvolio and Romeo.

BENVOLIO.
Tut, man, one fire burns out another’s burning,
One pain is lessen’d by another’s anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with another’s languish:
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO.
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO.
For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO.
For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO.
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO.
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is:
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipp’d and tormented and—God-den, good fellow.

SERVANT.
God gi’ go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

ROMEO.
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

SERVANT.
Perhaps you have learned it without book.
But I pray, can you read anything you see?

ROMEO.
Ay, If I know the letters and the language.

SERVANT.
Ye say honestly, rest you merry!

ROMEO.
Stay, fellow; I can read.

 [_He reads the letter._]

_Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
The lady widow of Utruvio;
Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces;
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt;
Lucio and the lively Helena. _


A fair assembly. [_Gives back the paper_] Whither should they come?

SERVANT.
Up.

ROMEO.
Whither to supper?

SERVANT.
To our house.

ROMEO.
Whose house?

SERVANT.
My master’s.

ROMEO.
Indeed I should have ask’d you that before.

SERVANT.
Now I’ll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet,
and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a
cup of wine. Rest you merry.

 [_Exit._]

BENVOLIO.
At this same ancient feast of Capulet’s
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov’st;
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Go thither and with unattainted eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO.
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire;
And these who, often drown’d, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Ne’er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself pois’d with herself in either eye:
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh’d
Your lady’s love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.

ROMEO.
I’ll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Room in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.

LADY CAPULET.
Nurse, where’s my daughter? Call her forth to me.

NURSE.
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! What ladybird!
God forbid! Where’s this girl? What, Juliet!

 Enter Juliet.

JULIET.
How now, who calls?

NURSE.
Your mother.

JULIET.
Madam, I am here. What is your will?

LADY CAPULET.
This is the matter. Nurse, give leave awhile,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again,
I have remember’d me, thou’s hear our counsel.
Thou knowest my daughter’s of a pretty age.

NURSE.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET.
She’s not fourteen.

NURSE.
I’ll lay fourteen of my teeth,
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four,
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammas-tide?

LADY CAPULET.
A fortnight and odd days.

NURSE.
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she,—God rest all Christian souls!—
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
’Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was wean’d,—I never shall forget it—,
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall;
My lord and you were then at Mantua:
Nay, I do bear a brain. But as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy, and fall out with the dug!
Shake, quoth the dovehouse: ’twas no need, I trow,
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven years;
For then she could stand alone; nay, by th’rood
She could have run and waddled all about;
For even the day before she broke her brow,
And then my husband,—God be with his soul!
A was a merry man,—took up the child:
‘Yea,’ quoth he, ‘dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule?’ and, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch left crying, and said ‘Ay’.
To see now how a jest shall come about.
I warrant, and I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it. ‘Wilt thou not, Jule?’ quoth he;
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said ‘Ay.’

LADY CAPULET.
Enough of this; I pray thee hold thy peace.

NURSE.
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh,
To think it should leave crying, and say ‘Ay’;
And yet I warrant it had upon it brow
A bump as big as a young cockerel’s stone;
A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.
‘Yea,’ quoth my husband, ‘fall’st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule?’ it stinted, and said ‘Ay’.

JULIET.
And stint thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.

NURSE.
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e’er I nurs’d:
And I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET.
Marry, that marry is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET.
It is an honour that I dream not of.

NURSE.
An honour! Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst suck’d wisdom from thy teat.

LADY CAPULET.
Well, think of marriage now: younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief;
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

NURSE.
A man, young lady! Lady, such a man
As all the world—why he’s a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET.
Verona’s summer hath not such a flower.

NURSE.
Nay, he’s a flower, in faith a very flower.

LADY CAPULET.
What say you, can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
Read o’er the volume of young Paris’ face,
And find delight writ there with beauty’s pen.
Examine every married lineament,
And see how one another lends content;
And what obscur’d in this fair volume lies,
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea; and ’tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in many’s eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less.

NURSE.
No less, nay bigger. Women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET.
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris’ love?

JULIET.
I’ll look to like, if looking liking move:
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

 Enter a Servant.

SERVANT.
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady
asked for, the Nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in extremity.
I must hence to wait, I beseech you follow straight.

LADY CAPULET.
We follow thee.

 [_Exit Servant._]

Juliet, the County stays.

NURSE.
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Street.

 Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six Maskers;
 Torch-bearers and others.

ROMEO.
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?

BENVOLIO.
The date is out of such prolixity:
We’ll have no Cupid hoodwink’d with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar’s painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance:
But let them measure us by what they will,
We’ll measure them a measure, and be gone.

ROMEO.
Give me a torch, I am not for this ambling;
Being but heavy I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO.
Not I, believe me, you have dancing shoes,
With nimble soles, I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO.
You are a lover, borrow Cupid’s wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO.
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Under love’s heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO.
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO.
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous; and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in: [_Putting on a mask._]
A visor for a visor. What care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Here are the beetle-brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO.
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO.
A torch for me: let wantons, light of heart,
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
For I am proverb’d with a grandsire phrase,
I’ll be a candle-holder and look on,
The game was ne’er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO.
Tut, dun’s the mouse, the constable’s own word:
If thou art dun, we’ll draw thee from the mire
Or save your reverence love, wherein thou stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho.

ROMEO.
Nay, that’s not so.

MERCUTIO.
I mean sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, light lights by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO.
And we mean well in going to this mask;
But ’tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO.
Why, may one ask?

ROMEO.
I dreamt a dream tonight.

MERCUTIO.
And so did I.

ROMEO.
Well what was yours?

MERCUTIO.
That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO.
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO.
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies’ midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Over men’s noses as they lie asleep:
Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners’ legs;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Her traces, of the smallest spider’s web;
The collars, of the moonshine’s watery beams;
Her whip of cricket’s bone; the lash, of film;
Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Prick’d from the lazy finger of a maid:
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o’ mind the fairies’ coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers’ brains, and then they dream of love;
O’er courtiers’ knees, that dream on curtsies straight;
O’er lawyers’ fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O’er ladies’ lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Sometime she gallops o’er a courtier’s nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig’s tail,
Tickling a parson’s nose as a lies asleep,
Then dreams he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth o’er a soldier’s neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscados, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes;
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two,
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night;
And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which, once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them, and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she,—

ROMEO.
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace,
Thou talk’st of nothing.

MERCUTIO.
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
And, being anger’d, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO.
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves:
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO.
I fear too early: for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars,
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night’s revels; and expire the term
Of a despised life, clos’d in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my suit. On, lusty gentlemen!

BENVOLIO.
Strike, drum.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. A Hall in Capulet’s House.

 Musicians waiting. Enter Servants.

FIRST SERVANT.
Where’s Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
He shift a trencher! He scrape a trencher!

SECOND SERVANT.
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men’s hands, and they
unwash’d too, ’tis a foul thing.

FIRST SERVANT.
Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the
plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane; and as thou loves me,
let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony and Potpan!

SECOND SERVANT.
Ay, boy, ready.

FIRST SERVANT.
You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the
great chamber.

SECOND SERVANT.
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys. Be brisk awhile, and
the longer liver take all.

 [_Exeunt._]

 Enter Capulet, &c. with the Guests and Gentlewomen to the Maskers.

CAPULET.
Welcome, gentlemen, ladies that have their toes
Unplagu’d with corns will have a bout with you.
Ah my mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She I’ll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor, and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady’s ear,
Such as would please; ’tis gone, ’tis gone, ’tis gone,
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall, give room! And foot it, girls.

 [_Music plays, and they dance._]

More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah sirrah, this unlook’d-for sport comes well.
Nay sit, nay sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days;
How long is’t now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

CAPULET’S COUSIN.
By’r Lady, thirty years.

CAPULET.
What, man, ’tis not so much, ’tis not so much:
’Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years; and then we mask’d.

CAPULET’S COUSIN.
’Tis more, ’tis more, his son is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.

CAPULET.
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO.
What lady is that, which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?

SERVANT.
I know not, sir.

ROMEO.
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiop’s ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
As yonder lady o’er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I’ll watch her place of stand,
And touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
For I ne’er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT.
This by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What, dares the slave
Come hither, cover’d with an antic face,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET.
Why how now, kinsman!
Wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT.
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
A villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET.
Young Romeo, is it?

TYBALT.
’Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET.
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,
A bears him like a portly gentleman;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-govern’d youth.
I would not for the wealth of all the town
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient, take no note of him,
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT.
It fits when such a villain is a guest:
I’ll not endure him.

CAPULET.
He shall be endur’d.
What, goodman boy! I say he shall, go to;
Am I the master here, or you? Go to.
You’ll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,
You’ll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop, you’ll be the man!

TYBALT.
Why, uncle, ’tis a shame.

CAPULET.
Go to, go to!
You are a saucy boy. Is’t so, indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what.
You must contrary me! Marry, ’tis time.
Well said, my hearts!—You are a princox; go:
Be quiet, or—More light, more light!—For shame!
I’ll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts.

TYBALT.
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
[_To Juliet._] If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this,
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

JULIET.
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss.

ROMEO.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET.
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO.
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do:
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers’ sake.

ROMEO.
Then move not while my prayer’s effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg’d.
[_Kissing her._]

JULIET.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

ROMEO.
Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg’d!
Give me my sin again.

JULIET.
You kiss by the book.

NURSE.
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

ROMEO.
What is her mother?

NURSE.
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nurs’d her daughter that you talk’d withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.

ROMEO.
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foe’s debt.

BENVOLIO.
Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.

ROMEO.
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.

CAPULET.
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone,
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it e’en so? Why then, I thank you all;
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
More torches here! Come on then, let’s to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late,
I’ll to my rest.

 [_Exeunt all but Juliet and Nurse._]

JULIET.
Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?

NURSE.
The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET.
What’s he that now is going out of door?

NURSE.
Marry, that I think be young Petruchio.

JULIET.
What’s he that follows here, that would not dance?

NURSE.
I know not.

JULIET.
Go ask his name. If he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

NURSE.
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET.
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed enemy.

NURSE.
What’s this? What’s this?

JULIET.
A rhyme I learn’d even now
Of one I danc’d withal.

 [_One calls within, ‘Juliet’._]

NURSE.
Anon, anon!
Come let’s away, the strangers all are gone.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT II


 Enter Chorus.

CHORUS.
Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
That fair for which love groan’d for and would die,
With tender Juliet match’d, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is belov’d, and loves again,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
But to his foe suppos’d he must complain,
And she steal love’s sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new beloved anywhere.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE I. An open place adjoining Capulet’s Garden.

 Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

 [_He climbs the wall and leaps down within it._]

 Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.

BENVOLIO.
Romeo! My cousin Romeo! Romeo!

MERCUTIO.
He is wise,
And on my life hath stol’n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO.
He ran this way, and leap’d this orchard wall:
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, I’ll conjure too.
Romeo! Humours! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh,
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but ‘Ah me!’ Pronounce but Love and dove;
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua lov’d the beggar-maid.
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline’s bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.

BENVOLIO.
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO.
This cannot anger him. ’Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress’ circle,
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it, and conjur’d it down;
That were some spite. My invocation
Is fair and honest, and, in his mistress’ name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO.
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love, and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
O Romeo, that she were, O that she were
An open-arse and thou a poperin pear!
Romeo, good night. I’ll to my truckle-bed.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO.
Go then; for ’tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Capulet’s Garden.

 Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

 Juliet appears above at a window.

But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun!
Arise fair sun and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
It is my lady, O it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses, I will answer it.
I am too bold, ’tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek.

JULIET.
Ay me.

ROMEO.
She speaks.
O speak again bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o’er my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET.
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name.
Or if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I’ll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO.
[_Aside._] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?

JULIET.
’Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What’s Montague? It is nor hand nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O be some other name.
What’s in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call’d,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.

ROMEO.
I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and I’ll be new baptis’d;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET.
What man art thou that, thus bescreen’d in night
So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO.
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET.
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongue’s utterance, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

ROMEO.
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.

JULIET.
How cam’st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO.
With love’s light wings did I o’erperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt:
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.

JULIET.
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO.
I have night’s cloak to hide me from their eyes,
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET.
By whose direction found’st thou out this place?

ROMEO.
By love, that first did prompt me to enquire;
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet wert thou as far
As that vast shore wash’d with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET.
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say Ay,
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear’st,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers’ perjuries,
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
I’ll frown and be perverse, and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo. But else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond;
And therefore thou mayst think my ’haviour light:
But trust me, gentleman, I’ll prove more true
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard’st, ere I was ’ware,
My true-love passion; therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO.
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops,—

JULIET.
O swear not by the moon, th’inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO.
What shall I swear by?

JULIET.
Do not swear at all.
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I’ll believe thee.

ROMEO.
If my heart’s dear love,—

JULIET.
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract tonight;
It is too rash, too unadvis’d, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say “It lightens.” Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, by summer’s ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.

ROMEO.
O wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET.
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?

ROMEO.
Th’exchange of thy love’s faithful vow for mine.

JULIET.
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO.
Would’st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?

JULIET.
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have;
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.
[_Nurse calls within._]
Anon, good Nurse!—Sweet Montague be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
O blessed, blessed night. I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

 Enter Juliet above.

JULIET.
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that I’ll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I’ll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

NURSE.
[_Within._] Madam.

JULIET.
I come, anon.— But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee,—

NURSE.
[_Within._] Madam.

JULIET.
By and by I come—
To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.

ROMEO.
So thrive my soul,—

JULIET.
A thousand times good night.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books,
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks.

 [_Retiring slowly._]

 Re-enter Juliet, above.

JULIET.
Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer’s voice
To lure this tassel-gentle back again.
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of my Romeo’s name.

ROMEO.
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers’ tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears.

JULIET.
Romeo.

ROMEO.
My dear?

JULIET.
What o’clock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO.
By the hour of nine.

JULIET.
I will not fail. ’Tis twenty years till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET.
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.

ROMEO.
And I’ll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET.
’Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone,
And yet no farther than a wanton’s bird,
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO.
I would I were thy bird.

JULIET.
Sweet, so would I:
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet sorrow
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest.
Hence will I to my ghostly Sire’s cell,
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.

 Enter Friar Lawrence with a basket.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
The grey-ey’d morn smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light;
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day’s pathway, made by Titan’s fiery wheels
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer, and night’s dank dew to dry,
I must upfill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth that’s nature’s mother, is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb:
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find.
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, strain’d from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice being misapplied,
And vice sometime’s by action dignified.

 Enter Romeo.

Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence, and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs,—grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO.
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distemper’d head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man’s eye,
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuff’d brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art uprous’d with some distemperature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.

ROMEO.
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
God pardon sin. Wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO.
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
I have forgot that name, and that name’s woe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
That’s my good son. But where hast thou been then?

ROMEO.
I’ll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
That’s by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
I bear no hatred, blessed man; for lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO.
Then plainly know my heart’s dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combin’d, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
We met, we woo’d, and made exchange of vow,
I’ll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young men’s love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath wash’d thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
To season love, that of it doth not taste.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ring in mine ancient ears.
Lo here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not wash’d off yet.
If ere thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline,
And art thou chang’d? Pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when there’s no strength in men.

ROMEO.
Thou chidd’st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO.
And bad’st me bury love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Not in a grave
To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO.
I pray thee chide me not, her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come young waverer, come go with me,
In one respect I’ll thy assistant be;
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your households’ rancour to pure love.

ROMEO.
O let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Street.

 Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.

MERCUTIO.
Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home tonight?

BENVOLIO.
Not to his father’s; I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO.
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline, torments him so
that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO.
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet, hath sent a letter to his father’s
house.

MERCUTIO.
A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO.
Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO.
Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO.
Nay, he will answer the letter’s master, how he dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO.
Alas poor Romeo, he is already dead, stabbed with a white wench’s black
eye; run through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart
cleft with the blind bow-boy’s butt-shaft. And is he a man to encounter
Tybalt?

BENVOLIO.
Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO.
More than Prince of cats. O, he’s the courageous captain of
compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance,
and proportion. He rests his minim rest, one, two, and the third in
your bosom: the very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist;
a gentleman of the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah,
the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hay.

BENVOLIO.
The what?

MERCUTIO.
The pox of such antic lisping, affecting phantasies; these new tuners
of accent. By Jesu, a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good
whore. Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should
be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers,
these pardon-me’s, who stand so much on the new form that they cannot
sit at ease on the old bench? O their bones, their bones!

 Enter Romeo.

BENVOLIO.
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo!

MERCUTIO.
Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art thou
fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura, to
his lady, was but a kitchen wench,—marry, she had a better love to
berhyme her: Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gypsy; Helen and Hero hildings
and harlots; Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
Romeo, bonjour! There’s a French salutation to your French slop. You
gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.

ROMEO.
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?

MERCUTIO.
The slip sir, the slip; can you not conceive?

ROMEO.
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as
mine a man may strain courtesy.

MERCUTIO.
That’s as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow
in the hams.

ROMEO.
Meaning, to curtsy.

MERCUTIO.
Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO.
A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO.
Pink for flower.

MERCUTIO.
Right.

ROMEO.
Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO.
Sure wit, follow me this jest now, till thou hast worn out thy pump,
that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the
wearing, solely singular.

ROMEO.
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness!

MERCUTIO.
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.

ROMEO.
Swits and spurs, swits and spurs; or I’ll cry a match.

MERCUTIO.
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done. For thou hast
more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits, than I am sure, I have in my
whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO.
Thou wast never with me for anything, when thou wast not there for the
goose.

MERCUTIO.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO.
Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO.
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting, it is a most sharp sauce.

ROMEO.
And is it not then well served in to a sweet goose?

MERCUTIO.
O here’s a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an
ell broad.

ROMEO.
I stretch it out for that word broad, which added to the goose, proves
thee far and wide a broad goose.

MERCUTIO.
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art thou
sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by art as
well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a great natural,
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO.
Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO.
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

BENVOLIO.
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

MERCUTIO.
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short, for I was come to the
whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy the argument no
longer.

 Enter Nurse and Peter.

ROMEO.
Here’s goodly gear!
A sail, a sail!

MERCUTIO.
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.

NURSE.
Peter!

PETER.
Anon.

NURSE.
My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO.
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan’s the fairer face.

NURSE.
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO.
God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.

NURSE.
Is it good-den?

MERCUTIO.
’Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the
prick of noon.

NURSE.
Out upon you! What a man are you?

ROMEO.
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.

NURSE.
By my troth, it is well said; for himself to mar, quoth a? Gentlemen,
can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO.
I can tell you: but young Romeo will be older when you have found him
than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for
fault of a worse.

NURSE.
You say well.

MERCUTIO.
Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i’faith; wisely, wisely.

NURSE.
If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.

BENVOLIO.
She will endite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!

ROMEO.
What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO.
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is something
stale and hoar ere it be spent.
[_Sings._]
    An old hare hoar,
    And an old hare hoar,
  Is very good meat in Lent;
    But a hare that is hoar
    Is too much for a score
  When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father’s? We’ll to dinner thither.

ROMEO.
I will follow you.

MERCUTIO.
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell, lady, lady, lady.

 [_Exeunt Mercutio and Benvolio._]

NURSE.
I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his
ropery?

ROMEO.
A gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak
more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.

NURSE.
And a speak anything against me, I’ll take him down, and a were lustier
than he is, and twenty such Jacks. And if I cannot, I’ll find those
that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none of
his skains-mates.—And thou must stand by too and suffer every knave to
use me at his pleasure!

PETER.
I saw no man use you at his pleasure; if I had, my weapon should
quickly have been out. I warrant you, I dare draw as soon as another
man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side.

NURSE.
Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy
knave. Pray you, sir, a word: and as I told you, my young lady bid me
enquire you out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself. But first
let me tell ye, if ye should lead her in a fool’s paradise, as they
say, it were a very gross kind of behaviour, as they say; for the
gentlewoman is young. And therefore, if you should deal double with
her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and
very weak dealing.

ROMEO. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto
thee,—

NURSE.
Good heart, and i’faith I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will
be a joyful woman.

ROMEO.
What wilt thou tell her, Nurse? Thou dost not mark me.

NURSE.
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a
gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO.
Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence’ cell
Be shriv’d and married. Here is for thy pains.

NURSE.
No truly, sir; not a penny.

ROMEO.
Go to; I say you shall.

NURSE.
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.

ROMEO.
And stay, good Nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee,
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell, be trusty, and I’ll quit thy pains;
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.

NURSE.
Now God in heaven bless thee. Hark you, sir.

ROMEO.
What say’st thou, my dear Nurse?

NURSE.
Is your man secret? Did you ne’er hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?

ROMEO.
I warrant thee my man’s as true as steel.

NURSE.
Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord! When ’twas a
little prating thing,—O, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that
would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief see a
toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes, and tell her that
Paris is the properer man, but I’ll warrant you, when I say so, she
looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and
Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO.
Ay, Nurse; what of that? Both with an R.

NURSE.
Ah, mocker! That’s the dog’s name. R is for the—no, I know it begins
with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it,
of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.

ROMEO.
Commend me to thy lady.

NURSE.
Ay, a thousand times. Peter!

 [_Exit Romeo._]

PETER.
Anon.

NURSE.
Before and apace.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Capulet’s Garden.

 Enter Juliet.

JULIET.
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse,
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That’s not so.
O, she is lame. Love’s heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the sun’s beams,
Driving back shadows over lowering hills:
Therefore do nimble-pinion’d doves draw love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day’s journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She’d be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.

 Enter Nurse and Peter.

O God, she comes. O honey Nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

NURSE.
Peter, stay at the gate.

 [_Exit Peter._]

JULIET.
Now, good sweet Nurse,—O Lord, why look’st thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou sham’st the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

NURSE.
I am aweary, give me leave awhile;
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I had!

JULIET.
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
Nay come, I pray thee speak; good, good Nurse, speak.

NURSE.
Jesu, what haste? Can you not stay a while? Do you not see that I am
out of breath?

JULIET.
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that;
Say either, and I’ll stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied, is’t good or bad?

NURSE.
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to choose a man.
Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than any man’s, yet his
leg excels all men’s, and for a hand and a foot, and a body, though
they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. He is not the
flower of courtesy, but I’ll warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench, serve God. What, have you dined at home?

JULIET.
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?

NURSE.
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o’ t’other side,—O my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jauncing up and down.

JULIET.
I’faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?

NURSE.
Your love says like an honest gentleman,
And a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome,
And I warrant a virtuous,—Where is your mother?

JULIET.
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest.
‘Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
‘Where is your mother?’

NURSE.
O God’s lady dear,
Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET.
Here’s such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?

NURSE.
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?

JULIET.
I have.

NURSE.
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence’ cell;
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
They’ll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder by the which your love
Must climb a bird’s nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. I’ll to dinner; hie you to the cell.

JULIET.
Hie to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE VI. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.

 Enter Friar Lawrence and Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
So smile the heavens upon this holy act
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.

ROMEO.
Amen, amen, but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph die; like fire and powder,
Which as they kiss consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness,
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

 Enter Juliet.

Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Will ne’er wear out the everlasting flint.
A lover may bestride the gossamers
That idles in the wanton summer air
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.

JULIET.
Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET.
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO.
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heap’d like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich music’s tongue
Unfold the imagin’d happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET.
Conceit more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
But my true love is grown to such excess,
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till holy church incorporate two in one.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT III

SCENE I. A public Place.


 Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, Page and Servants.

BENVOLIO.
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let’s retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
For now these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO.
Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the confines of
a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table, and says ‘God send me no
need of thee!’ and by the operation of the second cup draws him on the
drawer, when indeed there is no need.

BENVOLIO.
Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO.
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy; and as
soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO.
And what to?

MERCUTIO.
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would
kill the other. Thou? Why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a
hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel
with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou
hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy
head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast
quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street, because he hath
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall
out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? with
another for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
tutor me from quarrelling!

BENVOLIO.
And I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee
simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO.
The fee simple! O simple!

 Enter Tybalt and others.

BENVOLIO.
By my head, here comes the Capulets.

MERCUTIO.
By my heel, I care not.

TYBALT.
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, good-den: a word with one of you.

MERCUTIO.
And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something; make it a
word and a blow.

TYBALT.
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, and you will give me
occasion.

MERCUTIO.
Could you not take some occasion without giving?

TYBALT.
Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.

MERCUTIO.
Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? And thou make minstrels of
us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here’s my fiddlestick, here’s
that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO.
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO.
Men’s eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no man’s pleasure, I.

 Enter Romeo.

TYBALT.
Well, peace be with you, sir, here comes my man.

MERCUTIO.
But I’ll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, he’ll be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him man.

TYBALT.
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: Thou art a villain.

ROMEO.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou know’st me not.

TYBALT.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO.
I do protest I never injur’d thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.

MERCUTIO.
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
[_Draws._] Alla stoccata carries it away.
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?

TYBALT.
What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO.
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives; that I mean to
make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest
of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears?
Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.

TYBALT.
[_Drawing._] I am for you.

ROMEO.
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO.
Come, sir, your passado.

 [_They fight._]

ROMEO.
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage,
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!

 [_Exeunt Tybalt with his Partizans._]

MERCUTIO.
I am hurt.
A plague o’ both your houses. I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO.
What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO.
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, ’tis enough.
Where is my page? Go villain, fetch a surgeon.

 [_Exit Page._]

ROMEO.
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO.
No, ’tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door, but ’tis
enough, ’twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a
grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o’ both
your houses. Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to
death. A braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
arithmetic!—Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your
arm.

ROMEO.
I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o’ both your houses.
They have made worms’ meat of me.
I have it, and soundly too. Your houses!

 [_Exeunt Mercutio and Benvolio._]

ROMEO.
This gentleman, the Prince’s near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation stain’d
With Tybalt’s slander,—Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin. O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper soften’d valour’s steel.

 Re-enter Benvolio.

BENVOLIO.
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio’s dead,
That gallant spirit hath aspir’d the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO.
This day’s black fate on mo days doth depend;
This but begins the woe others must end.

 Re-enter Tybalt.

BENVOLIO.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO.
Again in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Away to heaven respective lenity,
And fire-ey’d fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the ‘villain’ back again
That late thou gav’st me, for Mercutio’s soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT.
Thou wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO.
This shall determine that.

 [_They fight; Tybalt falls._]

BENVOLIO.
Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amaz’d. The Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!

ROMEO.
O, I am fortune’s fool!

BENVOLIO.
Why dost thou stay?

 [_Exit Romeo._]

 Enter Citizens.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Which way ran he that kill’d Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO.
There lies that Tybalt.

FIRST CITIZEN.
Up, sir, go with me.
I charge thee in the Prince’s name obey.

 Enter Prince, attended; Montague, Capulet, their Wives and others.

PRINCE.
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO.
O noble Prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET.
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother’s child!
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill’d
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin.

PRINCE.
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO.
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo’s hand did slay;
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urg’d withal
Your high displeasure. All this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow’d
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio’s breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
‘Hold, friends! Friends, part!’ and swifter than his tongue,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And ’twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertain’d revenge,
And to’t they go like lightning; for, ere I
Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain;
And as he fell did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET.
He is a kinsman to the Montague.
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

PRINCE.
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE.
Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutio’s friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE.
And for that offence
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I have an interest in your hate’s proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But I’ll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. A Room in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Juliet.

JULIET.
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus’ lodging. Such a waggoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaway’s eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalk’d of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties: or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Play’d for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood my unmann’d blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle, till strange love, grow bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night, come Romeo; come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a raven’s back.
Come gentle night, come loving black-brow’d night,
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night,
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possess’d it; and though I am sold,
Not yet enjoy’d. So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them. O, here comes my Nurse,
And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo’s name speaks heavenly eloquence.

 Enter Nurse, with cords.

Now, Nurse, what news? What hast thou there?
The cords that Romeo bid thee fetch?

NURSE.
Ay, ay, the cords.

 [_Throws them down._]

JULIET.
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?

NURSE.
Ah, well-a-day, he’s dead, he’s dead, he’s dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, he’s gone, he’s kill’d, he’s dead.

JULIET.
Can heaven be so envious?

NURSE.
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo.
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET.
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roar’d in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but Ay,
And that bare vowel I shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
I am not I if there be such an I;
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer Ay.
If he be slain, say Ay; or if not, No.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

NURSE.
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
God save the mark!—here on his manly breast.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub’d in blood,
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.

JULIET.
O, break, my heart. Poor bankrout, break at once.
To prison, eyes; ne’er look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.

NURSE.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had.
O courteous Tybalt, honest gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead.

JULIET.
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughter’d and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then dreadful trumpet sound the general doom,
For who is living, if those two are gone?

NURSE.
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished,
Romeo that kill’d him, he is banished.

JULIET.
O God! Did Romeo’s hand shed Tybalt’s blood?

NURSE.
It did, it did; alas the day, it did.

JULIET.
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical,
Dove-feather’d raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem’st,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace.

NURSE.
There’s no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men. All perjur’d,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where’s my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo.

JULIET.
Blister’d be thy tongue
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his brow shame is asham’d to sit;
For ’tis a throne where honour may be crown’d
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

NURSE.
Will you speak well of him that kill’d your cousin?

JULIET.
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I thy three-hours’ wife have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have kill’d my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring,
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you mistaking offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,
And Tybalt’s dead, that would have slain my husband.
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt’s death,
That murder’d me. I would forget it fain,
But O, it presses to my memory
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners’ minds.
Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banished.
That ‘banished,’ that one word ‘banished,’
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt’s death
Was woe enough, if it had ended there.
Or if sour woe delights in fellowship,
And needly will be rank’d with other griefs,
Why follow’d not, when she said Tybalt’s dead,
Thy father or thy mother, nay or both,
Which modern lamentation might have mov’d?
But with a rear-ward following Tybalt’s death,
‘Romeo is banished’—to speak that word
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. Romeo is banished,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word’s death, no words can that woe sound.
Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?

NURSE.
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt’s corse.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET.
Wash they his wounds with tears. Mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo’s banishment.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil’d,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exil’d.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come cords, come Nurse, I’ll to my wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead.

NURSE.
Hie to your chamber. I’ll find Romeo
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
I’ll to him, he is hid at Lawrence’ cell.

JULIET.
O find him, give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Friar Lawrence’s cell.

 Enter Friar Lawrence.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enanmour’d of thy parts
And thou art wedded to calamity.

 Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
Father, what news? What is the Prince’s doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince’s doom.

ROMEO.
What less than doomsday is the Prince’s doom?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
A gentler judgment vanish’d from his lips,
Not body’s death, but body’s banishment.

ROMEO.
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say death;
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO.
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence banished is banish’d from the world,
And world’s exile is death. Then banished
Is death misterm’d. Calling death banished,
Thou cutt’st my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind Prince,
Taking thy part, hath brush’d aside the law,
And turn’d that black word death to banishment.
This is dear mercy, and thou see’st it not.

ROMEO.
’Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog,
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet’s hand,
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.
But Romeo may not, he is banished.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly.
They are free men but I am banished.
And say’st thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mix’d, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne’er so mean,
But banished to kill me? Banished?
O Friar, the damned use that word in hell.
Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess’d,
To mangle me with that word banished?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Thou fond mad man, hear me speak a little,

ROMEO.
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I’ll give thee armour to keep off that word,
Adversity’s sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO.
Yet banished? Hang up philosophy.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a Prince’s doom,
It helps not, it prevails not, talk no more.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O, then I see that mad men have no ears.

ROMEO.
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

 [_Knocking within._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO.
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.

 [_Knocking._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hark, how they knock!—Who’s there?—Romeo, arise,
Thou wilt be taken.—Stay awhile.—Stand up.

 [_Knocking._]

Run to my study.—By-and-by.—God’s will,
What simpleness is this.—I come, I come.

 [_Knocking._]

Who knocks so hard? Whence come you, what’s your will?

NURSE.
[_Within._] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
I come from Lady Juliet.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Welcome then.

 Enter Nurse.

NURSE.
O holy Friar, O, tell me, holy Friar,
Where is my lady’s lord, where’s Romeo?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

NURSE.
O, he is even in my mistress’ case.
Just in her case! O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament. Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man.
For Juliet’s sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO.
Nurse.

NURSE.
Ah sir, ah sir, death’s the end of all.

ROMEO.
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murderer,
Now I have stain’d the childhood of our joy
With blood remov’d but little from her own?
Where is she? And how doth she? And what says
My conceal’d lady to our cancell’d love?

NURSE.
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

ROMEO.
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that name’s cursed hand
Murder’d her kinsman. O, tell me, Friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.

 [_Drawing his sword._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold thy desperate hand.
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amaz’d me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temper’d.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
And slay thy lady, that in thy life lives,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why rail’st thou on thy birth, the heaven and earth?
Since birth, and heaven and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou sham’st thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which, like a usurer, abound’st in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vow’d to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier’s flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismember’d with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man. Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew’st Tybalt; there art thou happy.
The law that threaten’d death becomes thy friend,
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But like a misshaped and sullen wench,
Thou putt’st up thy Fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went’st forth in lamentation.
Go before, Nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.

NURSE.
O Lord, I could have stay’d here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
My lord, I’ll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

NURSE.
Here sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

 [_Exit._]

ROMEO.
How well my comfort is reviv’d by this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Go hence, good night, and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguis’d from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. I’ll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand; ’tis late; farewell; good night.

ROMEO.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE IV. A Room in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet and Paris.

CAPULET.
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she lov’d her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
’Tis very late; she’ll not come down tonight.
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been abed an hour ago.

PARIS.
These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.

LADY CAPULET.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow;
Tonight she’s mew’d up to her heaviness.

CAPULET.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child’s love. I think she will be rul’d
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Acquaint her here of my son Paris’ love,
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next,
But, soft, what day is this?

PARIS.
Monday, my lord.

CAPULET.
Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
A Thursday let it be; a Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
We’ll keep no great ado,—a friend or two,
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore we’ll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS.
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.

CAPULET.
Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Farewell, my lord.—Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me, it is so very very late that we
May call it early by and by. Good night.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. An open Gallery to Juliet’s Chamber, overlooking the Garden.

 Enter Romeo and Juliet.

JULIET.
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierc’d the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO.
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
Night’s candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET.
Yond light is not daylight, I know it, I.
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet, thou need’st not to be gone.

ROMEO.
Let me be ta’en, let me be put to death,
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I’ll say yon grey is not the morning’s eye,
’Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia’s brow.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
Come, death, and welcome. Juliet wills it so.
How is’t, my soul? Let’s talk. It is not day.

JULIET.
It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away.
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes.
O, now I would they had chang’d voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt’s-up to the day.
O now be gone, more light and light it grows.

ROMEO.
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.

 Enter Nurse.

NURSE.
Madam.

JULIET.
Nurse?

NURSE.
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke, be wary, look about.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO.
Farewell, farewell, one kiss, and I’ll descend.

 [_Descends._]

JULIET.
Art thou gone so? Love, lord, ay husband, friend,
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo.

ROMEO.
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET.
O thinkest thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO.
I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

JULIET.
O God! I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look’st pale.

ROMEO.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.

 [_Exit below._]

JULIET.
O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle,
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renown’d for faith? Be fickle, Fortune;
For then, I hope thou wilt not keep him long
But send him back.

LADY CAPULET.
[_Within._] Ho, daughter, are you up?

JULIET.
Who is’t that calls? Is it my lady mother?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustom’d cause procures her hither?

 Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET.
Why, how now, Juliet?

JULIET.
Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET.
Evermore weeping for your cousin’s death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
And if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done: some grief shows much of love,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.

JULIET.
Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET.
Well, girl, thou weep’st not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughter’d him.

JULIET.
What villain, madam?

LADY CAPULET.
That same villain Romeo.

JULIET.
Villain and he be many miles asunder.
God pardon him. I do, with all my heart.
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

LADY CAPULET.
That is because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET.
Ay madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might venge my cousin’s death.

LADY CAPULET.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. I’ll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banish’d runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustom’d dram
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET.
Indeed I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold him—dead—
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex’d.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him nam’d, and cannot come to him,
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that hath slaughter’d him.

LADY CAPULET.
Find thou the means, and I’ll find such a man.
But now I’ll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET.
And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

LADY CAPULET.
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
One who to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expects not, nor I look’d not for.

JULIET.
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?

LADY CAPULET.
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter’s Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET.
Now by Saint Peter’s Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed.

LADY CAPULET.
Here comes your father, tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

 Enter Capulet and Nurse.

CAPULET.
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of my brother’s son
It rains downright.
How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood, the winds, thy sighs,
Who raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Have you deliver’d to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET.
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.

CAPULET.
Soft. Take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

JULIET.
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.

CAPULET.
How now, how now, chopp’d logic? What is this?
Proud, and, I thank you, and I thank you not;
And yet not proud. Mistress minion you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints ’gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter’s Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!

LADY CAPULET.
Fie, fie! What, are you mad?

JULIET.
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET.
Hang thee young baggage, disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what,—get thee to church a Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me.
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child;
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.

NURSE.
God in heaven bless her.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET.
And why, my lady wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.

NURSE.
I speak no treason.

CAPULET.
O God ye good-en!

NURSE.
May not one speak?

CAPULET.
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o’er a gossip’s bowl,
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET.
You are too hot.

CAPULET.
God’s bread, it makes me mad!
Day, night, hour, ride, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her match’d, and having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly allied,
Stuff’d, as they say, with honourable parts,
Proportion’d as one’s thought would wish a man,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune’s tender,
To answer, ‘I’ll not wed, I cannot love,
I am too young, I pray you pardon me.’
But, and you will not wed, I’ll pardon you.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to’t, think on’t, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise.
And you be mine, I’ll give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For by my soul, I’ll ne’er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to’t, bethink you, I’ll not be forsworn.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O sweet my mother, cast me not away,
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET.
Talk not to me, for I’ll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
O God! O Nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself.
What say’st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, Nurse.

NURSE.
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banished; and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne’er come back to challenge you.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County.
O, he’s a lovely gentleman.
Romeo’s a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead, or ’twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.

JULIET.
Speakest thou from thy heart?

NURSE.
And from my soul too,
Or else beshrew them both.

JULIET.
Amen.

NURSE.
What?

JULIET.
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in, and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeas’d my father, to Lawrence’ cell,
To make confession and to be absolv’d.

NURSE.
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath prais’d him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I’ll to the Friar to know his remedy.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.

 [_Exit._]




ACT IV

SCENE I. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.


 Enter Friar Lawrence and Paris.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

PARIS.
My father Capulet will have it so;
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
You say you do not know the lady’s mind.
Uneven is the course; I like it not.

PARIS.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt’s death,
And therefore have I little talk’d of love;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway;
And in his wisdom, hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
[_Aside._] I would I knew not why it should be slow’d.—
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

 Enter Juliet.

PARIS.
Happily met, my lady and my wife!

JULIET.
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS.
That may be, must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET.
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
That’s a certain text.

PARIS.
Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET.
To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS.
Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET.
I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS.
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET.
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back than to your face.

PARIS.
Poor soul, thy face is much abus’d with tears.

JULIET.
The tears have got small victory by that;
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS.
Thou wrong’st it more than tears with that report.

JULIET.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander’d it.

JULIET.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.—
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS.
God shield I should disturb devotion!—
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye,
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.

 [_Exit._]

JULIET.
O shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help!

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
O Juliet, I already know thy grief;
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.

JULIET.
Tell me not, Friar, that thou hear’st of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I’ll help it presently.
God join’d my heart and Romeo’s, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo’s seal’d,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc’d time,
Give me some present counsel, or behold
’Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die,
If what thou speak’st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That cop’st with death himself to scape from it.
And if thou dar’st, I’ll give thee remedy.

JULIET.
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears;
Or hide me nightly in a charnel-house,
O’er-cover’d quite with dead men’s rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave,
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble,
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstain’d wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold then. Go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow;
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone,
Let not thy Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off,
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest,
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes; thy eyes’ windows fall,
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part depriv’d of supple government,
Shall stiff and stark and cold appear like death.
And in this borrow’d likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes, uncover’d, on the bier,
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Abate thy valour in the acting it.

JULIET.
Give me, give me! O tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. I’ll send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET.
Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Hall in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet, Nurse and Servants.

CAPULET.
So many guests invite as here are writ.

 [_Exit first Servant._]

Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

SECOND SERVANT.
You shall have none ill, sir; for I’ll try if they can lick their
fingers.

CAPULET.
How canst thou try them so?

SECOND SERVANT.
Marry, sir, ’tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers;
therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET.
Go, begone.

 [_Exit second Servant._]

We shall be much unfurnish’d for this time.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?

NURSE.
Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET.
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self-will’d harlotry it is.

 Enter Juliet.

NURSE.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET.
How now, my headstrong. Where have you been gadding?

JULIET.
Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests; and am enjoin’d
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here,
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you.
Henceforward I am ever rul’d by you.

CAPULET.
Send for the County, go tell him of this.
I’ll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.

JULIET.
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence’ cell,
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not stepping o’er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET.
Why, I am glad on’t. This is well. Stand up.
This is as’t should be. Let me see the County.
Ay, marry. Go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now afore God, this reverend holy Friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?

LADY CAPULET.
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.

CAPULET.
Go, Nurse, go with her. We’ll to church tomorrow.

 [_Exeunt Juliet and Nurse._]

LADY CAPULET.
We shall be short in our provision,
’Tis now near night.

CAPULET.
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
I’ll not to bed tonight, let me alone.
I’ll play the housewife for this once.—What, ho!—
They are all forth: well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim’d.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE III. Juliet’s Chamber.

 Enter Juliet and Nurse.

JULIET.
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle Nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight;
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou know’st, is cross and full of sin.

 Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET.
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?

JULIET.
No, madam; we have cull’d such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET.
Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.

 [_Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse._]

JULIET.
Farewell. God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
I’ll call them back again to comfort me.
Nurse!—What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.

 [_Laying down her dagger._]

What if it be a poison, which the Friar
Subtly hath minister’d to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour’d,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There’s a fearful point!
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are pack’d,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort—
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad.
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers’ joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman’s bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
O look, methinks I see my cousin’s ghost
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon a rapier’s point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, here’s drink! I drink to thee.

 [_Throws herself on the bed._]

SCENE IV. Hall in Capulet’s House.

 Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.

LADY CAPULET.
Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, Nurse.

NURSE.
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

 Enter Capulet.

CAPULET.
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow’d,
The curfew bell hath rung, ’tis three o’clock.
Look to the bak’d meats, good Angelica;
Spare not for cost.

NURSE.
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed; faith, you’ll be sick tomorrow
For this night’s watching.

CAPULET.
No, not a whit. What! I have watch’d ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne’er been sick.

LADY CAPULET.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
But I will watch you from such watching now.

 [_Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse._]

CAPULET.
A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!

 Enter Servants, with spits, logs and baskets.

Now, fellow, what’s there?

FIRST SERVANT.
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

CAPULET.
Make haste, make haste.

 [_Exit First Servant._]

—Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

SECOND SERVANT.
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

 [_Exit._]

CAPULET.
Mass and well said; a merry whoreson, ha.
Thou shalt be loggerhead.—Good faith, ’tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would. I hear him near.

 [_Play music._]

Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!

 Re-enter Nurse.

Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up.
I’ll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste I say.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE V. Juliet’s Chamber; Juliet on the bed.

 Enter Nurse.

NURSE.
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Why, lamb, why, lady, fie, you slug-abed!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now.
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Marry and amen. How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
He’ll fright you up, i’faith. Will it not be?
What, dress’d, and in your clothes, and down again?
I must needs wake you. Lady! Lady! Lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady’s dead!
O, well-a-day that ever I was born.
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! My lady!

 Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET.
What noise is here?

NURSE.
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET.
What is the matter?

NURSE.
Look, look! O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET.
O me, O me! My child, my only life.
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.

 Enter Capulet.

CAPULET.
For shame, bring Juliet forth, her lord is come.

NURSE.
She’s dead, deceas’d, she’s dead; alack the day!

LADY CAPULET.
Alack the day, she’s dead, she’s dead, she’s dead!

CAPULET.
Ha! Let me see her. Out alas! She’s cold,
Her blood is settled and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

NURSE.
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET.
O woful time!

CAPULET.
Death, that hath ta’en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

 Enter Friar Lawrence and Paris with Musicians.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET.
Ready to go, but never to return.
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Hath death lain with thy bride. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law, death is my heir;
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And leave him all; life, living, all is death’s.

PARIS.
Have I thought long to see this morning’s face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET.
Accurs’d, unhappy, wretched, hateful day.
Most miserable hour that e’er time saw
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage.
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catch’d it from my sight.

NURSE.
O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day.
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day.
Never was seen so black a day as this.
O woeful day, O woeful day.

PARIS.
Beguil’d, divorced, wronged, spited, slain.
Most detestable death, by thee beguil’d,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown.
O love! O life! Not life, but love in death!

CAPULET.
Despis’d, distressed, hated, martyr’d, kill’d.
Uncomfortable time, why cam’st thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! My soul, and not my child,
Dead art thou. Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Peace, ho, for shame. Confusion’s cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid, now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion,
For ’twas your heaven she should be advanc’d,
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc’d
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
She’s not well married that lives married long,
But she’s best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best array bear her to church;
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature’s tears are reason’s merriment.

CAPULET.
All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris, everyone prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lower upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.

 [_Exeunt Capulet, Lady Capulet, Paris and Friar._]

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.

NURSE.
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For well you know this is a pitiful case.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

 [_Exit Nurse._]

 Enter Peter.

PETER.
Musicians, O, musicians, ‘Heart’s ease,’ ‘Heart’s ease’, O, and you
will have me live, play ‘Heart’s ease.’

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Why ‘Heart’s ease’?

PETER.
O musicians, because my heart itself plays ‘My heart is full’. O play
me some merry dump to comfort me.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Not a dump we, ’tis no time to play now.

PETER.
You will not then?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
No.

PETER.
I will then give it you soundly.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
What will you give us?

PETER.
No money, on my faith, but the gleek! I will give you the minstrel.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Then will I give you the serving-creature.

PETER.
Then will I lay the serving-creature’s dagger on your pate. I will
carry no crotchets. I’ll re you, I’ll fa you. Do you note me?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
And you re us and fa us, you note us.

SECOND MUSICIAN.
Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

PETER.
Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat you with an iron wit, and
put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
    ‘When griping griefs the heart doth wound,
      And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
    Then music with her silver sound’—
Why ‘silver sound’? Why ‘music with her silver sound’? What say you,
Simon Catling?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

PETER.
Prates. What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

SECOND MUSICIAN.
I say ‘silver sound’ because musicians sound for silver.

PETER.
Prates too! What say you, James Soundpost?

THIRD MUSICIAN.
Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER.
O, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is
‘music with her silver sound’ because musicians have no gold for
sounding.
      ‘Then music with her silver sound
      With speedy help doth lend redress.’

 [_Exit._]

FIRST MUSICIAN.
What a pestilent knave is this same!

SECOND MUSICIAN.
Hang him, Jack. Come, we’ll in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay
dinner.

 [_Exeunt._]




ACT V

SCENE I. Mantua. A Street.


 Enter Romeo.

ROMEO.
If I may trust the flattering eye of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosom’s lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all this day an unaccustom’d spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead,—
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think!—
And breath’d such life with kisses in my lips,
That I reviv’d, and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possess’d,
When but love’s shadows are so rich in joy.

 Enter Balthasar.

News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again;
For nothing can be ill if she be well.

BALTHASAR.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capel’s monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred’s vault,
And presently took post to tell it you.
O pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO.
Is it even so? Then I defy you, stars!
Thou know’st my lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses. I will hence tonight.

BALTHASAR.
I do beseech you sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.

ROMEO.
Tush, thou art deceiv’d.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?

BALTHASAR.
No, my good lord.

ROMEO.
No matter. Get thee gone,
And hire those horses. I’ll be with thee straight.

 [_Exit Balthasar._]

Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Let’s see for means. O mischief thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
I do remember an apothecary,—
And hereabouts he dwells,—which late I noted
In tatter’d weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples, meagre were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuff’d, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinly scatter’d, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
And if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar’s shop is shut.
What, ho! Apothecary!

 Enter Apothecary.

APOTHECARY.
Who calls so loud?

ROMEO.
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
And that the trunk may be discharg’d of breath
As violently as hasty powder fir’d
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon’s womb.

APOTHECARY.
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua’s law
Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear’st to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.
The world is not thy friend, nor the world’s law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.

APOTHECARY.
My poverty, but not my will consents.

ROMEO.
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.

APOTHECARY.
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would despatch you straight.

ROMEO.
There is thy gold, worse poison to men’s souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none.
Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet’s grave, for there must I use thee.

 [_Exeunt._]

SCENE II. Friar Lawrence’s Cell.

 Enter Friar John.

FRIAR JOHN.
Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, ho!

 Enter Friar Lawrence.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN.
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Seal’d up the doors, and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay’d.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Who bare my letter then to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN.
I could not send it,—here it is again,—
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN.
Brother, I’ll go and bring it thee.

 [_Exit._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.
Poor living corse, clos’d in a dead man’s tomb.

 [_Exit._]

SCENE III. A churchyard; in it a Monument belonging to the Capulets.

 Enter Paris, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch.

PARIS.
Give me thy torch, boy. Hence and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground;
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hear’st something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

PAGE.
[_Aside._] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.

 [_Retires._]

PARIS.
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or wanting that, with tears distill’d by moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep,
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.

 [_The Page whistles._]

The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way tonight,
To cross my obsequies and true love’s rite?
What, with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.

 [_Retires._]

 Enter Romeo and Balthasar with a torch, mattock, &c.

ROMEO.
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light; upon thy life I charge thee,
Whate’er thou hear’st or seest, stand all aloof
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my lady’s face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
But if thou jealous dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven I will tear thee joint by joint,
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my intents are savage-wild;
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR.
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

ROMEO.
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Live, and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR.
For all this same, I’ll hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.

 [_Retires_]

ROMEO.
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorg’d with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,

 [_Breaking open the door of the monument._]

And in despite, I’ll cram thee with more food.

PARIS.
This is that banish’d haughty Montague
That murder’d my love’s cousin,—with which grief,
It is supposed, the fair creature died,—
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.

 [_Advances._]

Stop thy unhallow’d toil, vile Montague.
Can vengeance be pursu’d further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey, and go with me, for thou must die.

ROMEO.
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head
By urging me to fury. O be gone.
By heaven I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither arm’d against myself.
Stay not, be gone, live, and hereafter say,
A madman’s mercy bid thee run away.

PARIS.
I do defy thy conjuration,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO.
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!

 [_They fight._]

PAGE.
O lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.

 [_Exit._]

PARIS.
O, I am slain! [_Falls._] If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

 [_Dies._]

ROMEO.
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio’s kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune’s book.
I’ll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
A grave? O no, a lantern, slaught’red youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr’d.

 [_Laying Paris in the monument._]

How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! Which their keepers call
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Call this a lightning? O my love, my wife,
Death that hath suck’d the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquer’d. Beauty’s ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death’s pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin. Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous;
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that I still will stay with thee,
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest;
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last.
Arms, take your last embrace! And, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death.
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide.
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark.
Here’s to my love! [_Drinks._] O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.

 [_Dies._]

 Enter, at the other end of the Churchyard, Friar Lawrence, with a
 lantern, crow, and spade.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Saint Francis be my speed. How oft tonight
Have my old feet stumbled at graves? Who’s there?
Who is it that consorts, so late, the dead?

BALTHASAR.
Here’s one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Bliss be upon you. Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels’ monument.

BALTHASAR.
It doth so, holy sir, and there’s my master,
One that you love.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Who is it?

BALTHASAR.
Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR.
Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR.
I dare not, sir;
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Stay then, I’ll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

BALTHASAR.
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
Romeo! [_Advances._]
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolour’d by this place of peace?

 [_Enters the monument._]

Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steep’d in blood? Ah what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance?
The lady stirs.

 [_Juliet wakes and stirs._]

JULIET.
O comfortable Friar, where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

 [_Noise within._]

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I’ll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.

JULIET.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.

 [_Exit Friar Lawrence._]

What’s here? A cup clos’d in my true love’s hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
O churl. Drink all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.

 [_Kisses him._]

Thy lips are warm!

FIRST WATCH.
[_Within._] Lead, boy. Which way?

JULIET.
Yea, noise? Then I’ll be brief. O happy dagger.

 [_Snatching Romeo’s dagger._]

This is thy sheath. [_stabs herself_] There rest, and let me die.

 [_Falls on Romeo’s body and dies._]

 Enter Watch with the Page of Paris.

PAGE.
This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.

FIRST WATCH.
The ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
Go, some of you, whoe’er you find attach.

 [_Exeunt some of the Watch._]

Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Go tell the Prince; run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues, some others search.

 [_Exeunt others of the Watch._]

We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.

 Re-enter some of the Watch with Balthasar.

SECOND WATCH.
Here’s Romeo’s man. We found him in the churchyard.

FIRST WATCH.
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

 Re-enter others of the Watch with Friar Lawrence.

THIRD WATCH. Here is a Friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchyard side.

FIRST WATCH.
A great suspicion. Stay the Friar too.

 Enter the Prince and Attendants.

PRINCE.
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning’s rest?

 Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet and others.

CAPULET.
What should it be that they so shriek abroad?

LADY CAPULET.
O the people in the street cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all run
With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE.
What fear is this which startles in our ears?

FIRST WATCH.
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new kill’d.

PRINCE.
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

FIRST WATCH.
Here is a Friar, and slaughter’d Romeo’s man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead men’s tombs.

CAPULET.
O heaven! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista’en, for lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter’s bosom.

LADY CAPULET.
O me! This sight of death is as a bell
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

 Enter Montague and others.

PRINCE.
Come, Montague, for thou art early up,
To see thy son and heir more early down.

MONTAGUE.
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight.
Grief of my son’s exile hath stopp’d her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE.
Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE.
O thou untaught! What manners is in this,
To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE.
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent,
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murder.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excus’d.

PRINCE.
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAWRENCE.
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she, there dead, that Romeo’s faithful wife.
I married them; and their stol’n marriage day
Was Tybalt’s doomsday, whose untimely death
Banish’d the new-made bridegroom from this city;
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin’d.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betroth’d, and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks, bid me devise some means
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her, so tutored by my art,
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrow’d grave,
Being the time the potion’s force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stay’d by accident; and yesternight
Return’d my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindred’s vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Her Nurse is privy. And if ought in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrific’d, some hour before his time,
Unto the rigour of severest law.

PRINCE.
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Where’s Romeo’s man? What can he say to this?

BALTHASAR.
I brought my master news of Juliet’s death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threaten’d me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not, and left him there.

PRINCE.
Give me the letter, I will look on it.
Where is the County’s Page that rais’d the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE.
He came with flowers to strew his lady’s grave,
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And by and by my master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE.
This letter doth make good the Friar’s words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death.
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor ’pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish’d.

CAPULET.
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
This is my daughter’s jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

MONTAGUE.
But I can give thee more,
For I will raise her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET.
As rich shall Romeo’s by his lady’s lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.

PRINCE.
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardon’d, and some punished,
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

 [_Exeunt._]




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ROMEO AND JULIET ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.




